---
title: "Section 1: Understand"
style: chapter page-1
---

# Section 1: Understand

# <span dir="ltr">Introduction</span>

<span dir="ltr">When children play, they are developing skills, habits and attitudes that will stay with them for the rest of their lives. Play is so important for the development of a child that it has been identified by the United Nations</span>[^1] <span dir="ltr">as a right of every child.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The skills required to properly develop self-discipline, motivation, and the ability to collaborate, all start to take root in the first six years of life. Through play, children learn how to cope with frustration, how to keep trying until they get it right, how to share with others, and how to express themselves.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 1: Introduction\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">What is the Natural Playgrounds Toolkit?</span>

<span dir="ltr">In many places children lack stimulating play opportunities. The Natural Playgrounds Toolkit was developed by [<span class="underline">Penreach</span>](https://penreach.co.za/) to raise awareness of the importance of play and to empower communities, grade R teachers and early childhood practitioners by providing them with the skills required to build a playground for young children out of natural resources.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who is it for?</span>

<span dir="ltr">The Natural Playgrounds Toolkit is a manual designed for you as a grade R teacher, early childhood development practitioner, community development worker, and all other interested stakeholders to study individually or as a group.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">How was it developed?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Penreach, with the support of the [<span class="underline">Roger Federer Foundation</span>](https://www.rogerfedererfoundation.org/en/home/) piloted the natural playgrounds project to establish a cost-effective educational outdoor environment that covers all spheres of a child’s development using natural products that can be sourced locally, within the community or surrounding areas. The Natural Playground Toolkit was developed to make this initiative available to other schools and communities.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">How should it be used?</span>

<span dir="ltr">The toolkit is divided into five sections that represent the different steps within the process of establishing a natural playground. In the toolkit you will find a toolbox of practical tools and samples that will help you consider everything necessary to make a success of your project. The toolkit will guide you through the whole process of establishing a natural playground in collaboration with parents and your local community.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">While you work through the toolkit, you are encouraged to keep a journal or a set of notes that can help you reflect on your journey and also to note down discussion points for your learning group. At first glance, some of the tools may seem to contain similar information. Each tool, however, forms a specific part of the process that enables you to get to the end result. There is no hard and fast rule that you have to use them all, or use them all exactly as they are presented. If you are an experienced community development worker some of the tools may seem so obvious that you could feel tempted to skip them. We do strongly suggest that you consider the pros and cons carefully before discarding a tool. Remember, however, that our goal is to leverage the experience, expertise and resources that community members and stakeholders bring to the table.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Children’s right to play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

### <span dir="ltr">International Laws & regulations on play</span>

**<span dir="ltr">United Nations ‐ Convention on the Rights of the Child</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Article 31:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Right to leisure, play and culture appropriate to the age of the child</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Right of the child to participate fully in cultural and artistic life</span>

<span dir="ltr">Article 12:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Respect for the views of the child</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children have the right to have their opinions taken into account.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Article 12:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts</span>

### <span dir="ltr">National Play Policy & Regulations</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The National Plan of Action for Children in South Africa 2012 – 2017</span>**

<span dir="ltr">“Play is part of early childhood development programmes and school curriculum and children are aware of its importance in their lives.”</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ensure that play is an integral part of all early childhood development programmes supporting the early learning of babies and young children.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Encourage and resource play activities for children and adolescents through the school curriculum.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ensure that each community has safe and wellkept play areas for children.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Children’s Act No. 38 of 2005</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Recognises play as a right and requires that “all proceedings, actions or decisions in a matter concerning a child recognise a child’s need for development and to engage in play and other recreational activities appropriate to the child’s age.”</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Regulations to the Children’s Act:</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Promote children’s rights to rest, leisure and play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Respect and promote cultural diversity and appreciation</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Design programmes according to children’s age and capacity for development, and meet the needs of the children for whom the services are provided, including children with a disability</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Provide a safe environment where premises and equipment are safe and clean and children are adequately supervised</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The South African National Curriculum Framework for Children from Birth to Four Years</span>**

<span dir="ltr">“Babies, toddlers and young children learn when they play with things around them, what they smell and taste and sound like. They also learn by watching other children play. They learn by watching what adults do. This takes time and adults need to make sure that all children have plenty of opportunities to learn through play, also called active learning.”</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The National Early Learning and Development Standards for Children From Birth to Four Years</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Recognise play as central to achieving early learning milestones.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Recognises the provision of “opportunities for active play as a universal strategy to be provided by all – parents, caregivers ‐ to enable positive growth and development.”</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The National Integrated Early Childhood Development Policy</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Play as a principle in early learning that government is duty‐bound to provide</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Increase the knowledge of parents and caregivers of the developmental value of play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Play‐sensitive planning and increased allocation of resources through town planning processes to make adequate play facilities available</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Section 1: Understand</span>

## <span dir="ltr">The importance of play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Play develops skills, habits and attitudes that stay with children for the rest of their lives.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 2: The importance of play\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Play in early childhood has a strong and lasting influence on a child’s health, wellbeing, and long‐term development. Studies show that early play experiences shape a child’s physical growth, capacity for learning, chances of finishing school, future employability, and even income.</span>[^2] <span dir="ltr">Through play, children develop the brain pathways that are needed to further learn and grow.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Did you know/fact box\]</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The first one thousand days in a child’s life holds the key to unlocking their life‐long potential.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">90% of critical brain development happens before age five.</span>[^3]<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference to be supplied.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-outdoor-play-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 1</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Long-term benefits of active outdoor play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Brain Pathways</span>

<span dir="ltr">The brain begins developing in the womb. During the first years of life dramatic growth takes place and positive experiences at this stage of development help to build strong brain connections.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Towards an adult brain</span>**

<span dir="ltr">A baby’s brain has more connections than an adult’s. The connections quickly increase until the point where the brain starts to “prune”. Active pathways that are regularly used and reinforced by experienced are kept and the rest are “pruned” away.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Over time a child develops more and more complex skills by using their different brain pathways.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Sensory Pathways</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Vision, hearing, touch, taste, smell</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Language Pathways</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Symbols, ideas, social relationships, talking</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Higher Cognitive Functions Pathways</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Critical thinking, reflective thinking, thoughtful actions</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Healthy brain development is determined by a child’s early life experiences, including a healthy pregnancy, safe and nurturing care, nutrition, language stimulation, play and lots and lots of attention and interaction. The neural pathways that are developed in a child’s first three years act like roadmaps for later learning</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">This reference is incomplete and the link is broken.</span>

<span dir="ltr">www.developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/inbrief-science-of-ecd/</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Sidenote reference\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">What children need to develop</span>

<span dir="ltr">During the first years of a child’s life factors such as adequate healthcare, good nutrition, good quality childcare and nurturing, a clean and safe environment, early learning and stimulation will influence the child’s future. To ensure that these important factors are met, each day of a child’s life should include:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Physical activities for large and small muscle development;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Creative activities using different natural and other materials;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Talking and listening activities with other children and with adults;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Challenging and exciting activities to develop intellectual abilities;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Opportunities for imaginative play;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Opportunities for rest and quiet play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Children learn best when they play and discover things for themselves, relax and have fun, talk and interact with others, and share their feelings and worries.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Guidelines for Early Childhood Development Services by the Department of Social Development</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-development-hierarchy</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Children who receive high-quality early childhood development are…</span>

<table><thead><tr class="header"><th><span dir="ltr">More likely to:</span></th><th><span dir="ltr">Less likely to:</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Show improved literacy skills</span></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">Drop out of school</span></p><p><span dir="ltr"></span></p></td></tr><tr class="even"><td><span dir="ltr">Show improved mathematics skills</span></td><td><span dir="ltr">Repeat grades</span></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Stay in school longer</span></td><td><span dir="ltr">Need Special Education</span></td></tr><tr class="even"><td><span dir="ltr">Complete high school</span></td><td><span dir="ltr"></span></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Study further</span></td><td><span dir="ltr"></span></td></tr></tbody></table>

<span dir="ltr">\[Pull quote\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">“Delays in cognitive and overall development before schooling can often have long lasting and costly consequences for children, families and society. The most effective and cost-efficient time to intervene is before birth and the early years of life. Investment in Early Childhood Development should be a key priority.”</span>

<span dir="ltr">(RSA National Development Plan: Vision for 2030)</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">“A holistic development addresses all the developmental needs of a child at the same time. In other words, Parents, Care Takers and ECD Centres cannot just ‘look after’ children, they have to make sure that children are developed to their fullest potential.”</span>

<span dir="ltr">(RSA Children’s Act no 38 of 2005)</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/pull quote\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-quality-ecd-areas</span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure: 3</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Quality early childhood development areas</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Learning through play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Slideline\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: How children learn through play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Through play children create new things, solve problems and form an understanding of the world</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Curious</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children are curious by nature.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-02</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Explore</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: The child’s curiosity drives them to explore through play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-03</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Discover</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When the child explores through play, they discover new things and learn.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-04</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Fun</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: The child experiences exploring and learning as fun.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-05</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Repeat</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children (and adults) like to repeat activities that are fun.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-06</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Mastery</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Repeating fun activities helps the child to master their skills.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-07</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Confidence</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: A child who is mastering new skills feels confident.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-08</span>

<span dir="ltr">TItle: New challenge</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: A confident child will try new challenges.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Slideline\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">What children learn through play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Play develops all the skills that children need to be ready for school and life.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-when-children-play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure: 5</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When children play they are:</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Age-appropriate play</span>

<span dir="ltr">As children get older they have more interests and skills. This means that their play gets more complicated.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure: 6</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: At this age I enjoy…</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

| <span dir="ltr">0 - 12 months</span> | <span dir="ltr">1 - 2 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">2 -3 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">3 - 4 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">4 - 5 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">I enjoy:</span>                          |
|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Discovering</span>                       |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Exploring</span>                         |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Interacting with adults</span>           |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Moving</span>                            |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Practicing</span>                        |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Imitating</span>                         |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Creating</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Stacking and building</span>             |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Filling and emptying things</span>       |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Pushing things together</span>           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Pulling things apart</span>              |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Hiding and finding</span>                |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Climbing and jumping</span>              |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Talking</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Asking questions</span>                  |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Interacting with children</span>         |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Testing</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Matching</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Dancing and singing</span>               |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Sharing</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Organising</span>                        |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Pretending</span>                        |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Playing simple games</span>              |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Problem solving</span>                   |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Running</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Understanding</span>                     |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Choosing</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Playing with language and numbers</span> |

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Figure 7 Slideline table, pull from Look and Feel and MS to see if tables can go in slidelines, if not add to artwork brief\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Outdoor free play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Free play has fewer rules, which leaves more room for self-discovery, imagination and creativity. Watch the video below to see the benefits and possibilities of outdoor free play.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 3: Outdoor free play\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Playground safety</span>

### <span dir="ltr">How to keep a safe playground</span>

<span dir="ltr">Follow these guidelines to ensure that your playground is safe:</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Check clothes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Remove necklaces</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Take off unzipped jackets, clothes with drawstrings and scarfs</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children must wear sports shoes with rubber soles or no shoes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children must wear a hat if there is no shade</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children must wear a raincoat if it is raining</span>

<span dir="ltr">Go over rules</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Take turns and share</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">No pushing, hitting or shoving</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Respect for others, themselves, and their space</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Good manners</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Clearly show where they may play and with what</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">No eating or drinking while playing</span>

<span dir="ltr">Look up</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is the area age appropriate?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Nothing higher than 1.5m</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Nothing closer than 2m from each other</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Are there broken or rusted parts on equipment?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is there anything wet or slippery?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is all play equipment secured to the ground?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Are there any small spaces where children can get stuck?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Look down</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is the area clear of objects that are too small for the age group?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that there are no poisonous or dangerous plants nearby</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that there is no litter or broken glass</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that no animals or dangerous insects are in the crawl spaces</span>

<span dir="ltr">Stay close</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stay engaged</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Do not use your mobile phone while children are playing</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Watch out for children who are not watching where they are going</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Watch out for any dangerous actions</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-playground-injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 7</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Common playground injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-age-group-injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 8</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Age group most likely to be injured</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-equipment-injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 9</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Equipment causes of injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Playground Safety Checklist</span>

<span dir="ltr">South Africa has the following safety guidelines in place for Early Childhood Development Centres:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">An outdoor play area of adequate size must be provided for use by every child on the premises including an outdoor play area of a minimum of at least 5m\<sup\>2\</sup\> per child on the premises and separate play areas for children between the ages of 0‐2 years and those between the ages of 3‐6 years.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The premises must be surrounded by a fence constructed by an approved material and a lockable gate to prevent a child from leaving the premises unnoticed as well as to prevent unauthorized entry by the public.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ponds, pits and or other hazards in any garden or external play area must be fenced off to ensure the safety of children. No poisonous or harmful plants may be grown on the premises.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Safety Checklist</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">Fall Height and Fall Zones</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the possible fall height less than 1.5m from all pieces of equipment?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is there a minimum clearance of at least 2m separating each piece of equipment?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Safety Surfacing</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is there impact-absorbing material under all pieces of equipment over 500mm in height? (e.g. sand, bark, mulch or ground rubber)</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the surfacing well maintained? (e.g. at least 300mm depth of loose fill material)</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Design Hazards</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment free of possible spaces a child could get their head stuck such as openings between 80mm and 230mm?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is all moving equipment free of any potential trapping and pinching points?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are there sturdy guard and handrails, appropriate to a child’s hand and grip size? Any platform higher than 30cm is required to have a rail.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Does the larger equipment prevent possible climbing on the outside of the structure? No structures may be higher than 1, 5 metres.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Shading</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is all equipment suitably shaded, if no natural shade applies?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Maintenance</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment’s frame stable and free from movement?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment free from rust, cracks or broken items?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are timber items on the equipment free from rotten or splintered wood?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is all equipment free of protruding fixings and sharp edges?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of loose stones or gravel?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of trip hazards?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of tree branches or anything sharp at children’s eye level?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Slide</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the slide securely anchored in the ground?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Does the slide have built up sides?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the slide steps have a guard rail?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Swings</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Are the swings securely anchored to the ground?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the swings for children under 6 years of age have chair-like back support?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the tyre swings have drainage holes to let out rain water?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area under the swings filled with sand?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Sandpit</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the sandpit placed in the shade or have a roof for sun protection?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the depth of the sand pit at least 40cm?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the sandpit filled with river sand?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Playground</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the playground enclosed and gated?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is there enough space in the play area for children to play?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are all garden tools, equipment and chemicals locked away?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area free of all poisonous or thorny plants?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area free of any litter or dangerous objects lying around, such as glass, tins and rusty nails?</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">How to design your natural playground</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">For this step you first need to understand how children play. When adults design playgrounds, there is a danger that we often think from our own point of view. This means that we provide play spaces that are reminiscent of our own experiences or what we’ve seen in other schools. We must also remember that the more expensive option isn’t always the best option.</span>

<span dir="ltr">We need to think and design from the child’s point of view. What do children need to develop holistically? How do children play at their best?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Design a playground for the children - not for yourself!</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-playground-concept</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Natural Playgrounds vs Traditional Playgrounds</span>

<span dir="ltr">Natural Playgrounds are different to traditional playgrounds in a number of ways.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

| <span dir="ltr">Traditional Playground</span>                                                                           | <span dir="ltr">Natural Playground</span>                                                                                      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span dir="ltr">Expensive to install</span>                                                                             | <span dir="ltr">Can be very cheap or even free to create</span>                                                                |
| <span dir="ltr">Needs maintenance and surveillance</span>                                                               | <span dir="ltr">Needs maintenance and storage</span>                                                                           |
| <span dir="ltr">Focuses on gross-motor play (running, jumping, sliding, and climbing)</span>                            | <span dir="ltr">Accommodates all types of play (gross-motor, fine motor, social etc)</span>                                    |
| <span dir="ltr">Fixed equipment is intended to be used in a certain way</span>                                          | <span dir="ltr">Loose parts, pathways, sand, water, trees and plants can be reimagined and redesigned by children daily</span> |
| <span dir="ltr">Become boring over time</span>                                                                          | <span dir="ltr">Become more engaging over time as the children’s skills improve</span>                                         |
| <span dir="ltr">Are inflexible to children’s ideas</span>                                                               | <span dir="ltr">Children can build their ideas in the real world</span>                                                        |
| <span dir="ltr">Purpose is physical fitness and so they are not always accessible for differently-abled children</span> | <span dir="ltr">Play can be imaginative and is accessible to all children</span>                                               |
| <span dir="ltr">Level of risk taking is predetermined by equipment</span>                                               | <span dir="ltr">Children can take risks at their ability level in a variety of situations</span>                               |

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Natural playground ideas</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Layout</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Make different play spaces for different kinds of activities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Spread play spaces throughout the playground ‐ don’t squash them all together in only one area</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Play spaces can be separated by paths</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Incorporate the natural elements (trees or rocks) as part of play spaces. If you do not have trees, plant some for future children. It can be a project where you involve the kids to help protect and water the trees. Find out from your closest nursery what trees grows fast and make a limited mess to clean up.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Well‐designed borders that demarcate or separate play spaces can offer as much (and sometimes more) play value than the play space itself. Wherever possible, incorporate natural borders (boulders, stumps, logs, shrubs etc.) of varying sizes and diverse materials.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Place larger or more popular play spaces (climbing structures, sand play areas) where they are easy to supervise. Make sure the supervisor can see all areas where children can play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Natural Elements</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">If you don’t have a “hill” in your playground, consider creating one and covering it with grass. This provides opportunities for climbing and rolling.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Consider a small vegetable garden where children are involved in the planting and watering. Research shows that children are more likely to eat vegetables that they helped to grow themselves.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make a “river bed” with stones. Select pebbles and stones that are an age-appropriate size.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Having a “table” or flat item in the sand play area encourages children not to carry the sand away from the sandpit.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Placing rocks and boulders in the playground provides challenging routes, sitting places or climbing opportunities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Trees and shrubs can be used as windbreaks, to provide shade and moderate the temperature, reduce glare, separate play spaces and can be educational tools. Trees that shed their leaves can block out the sun in summer but allow the warmth in winter sun. Plants can also be used to create hidden spaces.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Slideline\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Different types of play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Different types of play all fit together to form an environment of holistic development.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Gross Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves movement helps to strengthen the body and develop gross motor skills. When children crawl through a tunnel, climb a tree or run around they learn body coordination, spatial awareness, and to enjoy exercise.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-02</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Fine Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves using the hands and fingers will develop hand eye coordination and fine motor control.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-03</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Construction Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves building something with loose parts. When children balance blocks on each other, build a “house” or create new roads in the playground they learn how to solve problems, use their senses, and how shapes fit together.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-04</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Drama Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Dramatic play is when children make up stories and act them out. This “pretend” play improves literacy and reading skills. When children play “house” or “teacher”, pretend to be an animal or listen to a story they learn how to communicate and take turns.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-05</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Music Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When given the opportunity to create music, children develop their creativity. When children play real or pretend musical instruments, sings songs, and dance they learn to use their hands and fingers, about sounds, rhythm and tempo, and gain self confidence.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-06</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Art Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When given the opportunity to create art, children develop their creativity. When children draw, paint or scribble or play with mud and clay they learn about different textures, cause and effect, and to explore and experiment with their environment.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-07</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Nature Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves exploring nature. This can be watching insects, planting plants, balancing on a rock or playing with feathers, leaves and seeds.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-08</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Water and Sand Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Water and sand offer opportunities to dig, pour, sift, scoop and build. This helps to develop big and small muscles, stimulates the senses, and allow children to learn math and science principles.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-09</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Solitary Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children need to be able to spend time alone if they want to. It is important to provide spaces where they can do this.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-10</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Sensory Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children develop sensory abilities including sight, smell, touch and sound as they play. All forms of play include sensory input. It’s important to provide your play environment with a variety of play equipment and loose parts to help children explore their sensory skills.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Slideline\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Loose Parts</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Loose Parts are materials with no specific set of directions that can be used alone or combined with other materials. They can be moved, carried, combined, redesigned, lined up, and taken apart and put back together in multiple ways.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">When you are wondering what will make a good loose part, ask yourself the following questions:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is it flexible or sturdy enough that it be used and reused in different ways without breaking or becoming dangerous?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is it something you can give to children, to do whatever they want with, even if that means finishing it or destroying it?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is it something that you can easily collect after playtime or something you can leave out all the time?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The list of possible loose parts is endless but can include:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Wooden coins (slices of wood about 3cm thick)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Logs of different heights and widths</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Chalk</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Cardboard boxes of various sizes and shapes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Leaves, feathers, shells or pine cones</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stones, pebbles or rocks</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Milk and bread crates</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Wooden pallets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Buckets, tubes and plastic gutters</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Funnels and hosepipes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Nets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Tyres of different shapes and sizes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Steering wheels</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Computer keyboards</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Old clothes for dressing up</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts should be easy to use and easy to put away. They can be stored in containers, sheds or open boxes against the side of the playground. Old suitcases or child-sized trolleys and wheelbarrows can be used for transporting loose parts to and from the storage place and encourage children to keep the playground tidy. Many loose parts are unlikely to be tampered with or stolen and can be left out depending on local circumstances.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Size is important. Large loose parts can be quicker to tidy away. Small loose parts like cones and shells can easily get scattered outside. Having them as part of the outdoor environment in a cone pit or using shells as mulch in raised beds and containers means less gathering. Synthetic small items are difficult to tidy and could impact the environment if left outside.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Think about how materials and resources will be dried on rainy days. Quick dry materials such as tarps and organza can be easier to manage than cotton‐based materials for den building and dressing up.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

