# <span dir="ltr">Introduction</span>

<span dir="ltr">When children play, they are developing skills, habits and attitudes that will stay with them for the rest of their lives. Play is so important for the development of a child that it has been identified by the United Nations</span>[^1] <span dir="ltr">as a right of every child.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The skills required to properly develop self-discipline, motivation, and the ability to collaborate, all start to take root in the first six years of life. Through play, children learn how to cope with frustration, how to keep trying until they get it right, how to share with others, and how to express themselves.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 1: Introduction\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">What is the Natural Playgrounds Toolkit?</span>

<span dir="ltr">In many places children lack stimulating play opportunities. The Natural Playgrounds Toolkit was developed by [<span class="underline">Penreach</span>](https://penreach.co.za/) to raise awareness of the importance of play and to empower communities, grade R teachers and early childhood practitioners by providing them with the skills required to build a playground for young children out of natural resources.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who is it for?</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">The Natural Playgrounds Toolkit is a manual designed for you as a grade R teacher, early childhood development practitioner, community development worker, and all other interested **stakeholders** to study individually or as a group.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">How was it developed?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Penreach, with the support of the [<span class="underline">Roger Federer Foundation</span>](https://www.rogerfedererfoundation.org/en/home/) piloted the natural playgrounds project to establish a cost-effective educational outdoor environment that covers all spheres of a child’s development using natural products that can be sourced locally, within the community or surrounding areas. The Natural Playground Toolkit was developed to make this initiative available to other schools and communities.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">How should it be used?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">The toolkit is divided into five sections that represent the different steps within the process of establishing a **natural playground**. In the toolkit you will find a toolbox of practical tools and samples that will help you consider everything necessary to make a success of your project. The toolkit will guide you through the whole process of establishing a natural playground in collaboration with parents and your local community.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">While you work through the toolkit, you are encouraged to keep a journal or a set of notes that can help you reflect on your journey and also to note down discussion points for your learning group. At first glance, some of the tools may seem to contain similar information. Each tool, however, forms a specific part of the process that enables you to get to the end result. There is no hard and fast rule that you have to use them all, or use them all exactly as they are presented. If you are an experienced community development worker some of the tools may seem so obvious that you could feel tempted to skip them. We do strongly suggest that you consider the pros and cons carefully before discarding a tool. Remember, however, that our goal is to leverage the experience, expertise and **resources** that community members and **stakeholders** bring to the table.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Children’s right to play</span>**

### <span dir="ltr">International Laws & regulations on play</span>

**<span dir="ltr">United Nations ‐ Convention on the Rights of the Child</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Article 31:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Right to leisure, play and culture appropriate to the age of the child</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Right of the child to participate fully in cultural and artistic life</span>

<span dir="ltr">Article 12:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Respect for the views of the child</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children have the right to have their opinions taken into account.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Article 12:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts</span>

### <span dir="ltr">National Play Policy & Regulations</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The National Plan of Action for Children in South Africa 2012 – 2017</span>**

<span dir="ltr">“Play is part of early childhood development programmes and school curriculum and children are aware of its importance in their lives.”</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ensure that play is an integral part of all early childhood development programmes supporting the early learning of babies and young children.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Encourage and resource play activities for children and adolescents through the school curriculum.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ensure that each community has safe and wellkept play areas for children.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Children’s Act No. 38 of 2005</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Recognises play as a right and requires that “all proceedings, actions or decisions in a matter concerning a child recognise a child’s need for development and to engage in play and other recreational activities appropriate to the child’s age.”</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Regulations to the Children’s Act:</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Promote children’s rights to rest, leisure and play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Respect and promote cultural diversity and appreciation</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Design programmes according to children’s age and capacity for development, and meet the needs of the children for whom the services are provided, including children with a disability</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Provide a safe environment where premises and equipment are safe and clean and children are adequately supervised</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The South African National Curriculum Framework for Children from Birth to Four Years</span>**

<span dir="ltr">“Babies, toddlers and young children learn when they play with things around them, what they smell and taste and sound like. They also learn by watching other children play. They learn by watching what adults do. This takes time and adults need to make sure that all children have plenty of opportunities to learn through play, also called active learning.”</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The National Early Learning and Development Standards for Children From Birth to Four Years</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Recognise play as central to achieving early learning milestones.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Recognises the provision of “opportunities for active play as a universal strategy to be provided by all – parents, caregivers ‐ to enable positive growth and development.”</span>

**<span dir="ltr">The National Integrated Early Childhood Development Policy</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Play as a principle in early learning that government is duty‐bound to provide</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Increase the knowledge of parents and caregivers of the developmental value of play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Play‐sensitive planning and increased allocation of resources through town planning processes to make adequate play facilities available</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Section 1: Understand</span>

## <span dir="ltr">The importance of play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Play develops skills, habits and attitudes that stay with children for the rest of their lives.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 2: The importance of play\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Play** in early childhood has a strong and lasting influence on a child’s health, wellbeing, and long‐term development. Studies show that early play experiences shape a child’s physical growth, capacity for learning, chances of finishing school, future employability, and even income.</span>[^2] <span dir="ltr">Through play, children develop the brain pathways that are needed to further learn and grow.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Did you know/fact box\]</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The first one thousand days in a child’s life holds the key to unlocking their life‐long potential.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">90% of critical brain development happens before age five.</span>[^3]<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference to be supplied.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-outdoor-play-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 1</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Long-term benefits of active outdoor play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Brain Pathways</span>

<span dir="ltr">The brain begins developing in the womb. During the first years of life dramatic growth takes place and positive experiences at this stage of development help to build strong brain connections.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Towards an adult brain</span>**

<span dir="ltr">A baby’s brain has more connections than an adult’s. The connections quickly increase until the point where the brain starts to “prune”. Active pathways that are regularly used and reinforced by experienced are kept and the rest are “pruned” away.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Over time a child develops more and more complex skills by using their different brain pathways.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Sensory Pathways</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Vision, hearing, touch, taste, smell</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Language Pathways</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Symbols, ideas, social relationships, talking</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Higher Cognitive Functions Pathways</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Critical thinking, reflective thinking, thoughtful actions</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Healthy brain development is determined by a child’s early life experiences, including a healthy pregnancy, safe and nurturing care, nutrition, language stimulation, play and lots and lots of attention and interaction. The neural pathways that are developed in a child’s first three years act like roadmaps for later learning</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">This reference is incomplete and the link is broken.</span>

<span dir="ltr">www.developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/inbrief-science-of-ecd/</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Sidenote reference\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">What children need to develop</span>

<span dir="ltr">During the first years of a child’s life factors such as adequate healthcare, good nutrition, good quality childcare and nurturing, a clean and safe environment, early learning and stimulation will influence the child’s future. To ensure that these important factors are met, each day of a child’s life should include:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Physical activities for large and small muscle development;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Creative activities using different natural and other materials;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Talking and listening activities with other children and with adults;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Challenging and exciting activities to develop intellectual abilities;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Opportunities for imaginative play;</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Opportunities for rest and quiet play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Children learn best when they play and discover things for themselves, relax and have fun, talk and interact with others, and share their feelings and worries.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Guidelines for Early Childhood Development Services by the Department of Social Development</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Sidenote reference\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-development-hierarchy</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Children who receive high-quality early childhood development are…</span>

<table><thead><tr class="header"><th><span dir="ltr">More likely to:</span></th><th><span dir="ltr">Less likely to:</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Show improved literacy skills</span></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">Drop out of school</span></p><p><span dir="ltr"></span></p></td></tr><tr class="even"><td><span dir="ltr">Show improved mathematics skills</span></td><td><span dir="ltr">Repeat grades</span></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Stay in school longer</span></td><td><span dir="ltr">Need Special Education</span></td></tr><tr class="even"><td><span dir="ltr">Complete high school</span></td><td><span dir="ltr"></span></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Study further</span></td><td><span dir="ltr"></span></td></tr></tbody></table>

<span dir="ltr">\[Pull quote\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">“Delays in cognitive and overall development before schooling can often have long lasting and costly consequences for children, families and society. The most effective and cost-efficient time to intervene is before birth and the early years of life. Investment in Early Childhood Development should be a key priority.”</span>

<span dir="ltr">(RSA National Development Plan: Vision for 2030)</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">“A holistic development addresses all the developmental needs of a child at the same time. In other words, Parents, Care Takers and ECD Centres cannot just ‘look after’ children, they have to make sure that children are developed to their fullest potential.”</span>

<span dir="ltr">(RSA Children’s Act no 38 of 2005)</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/pull quote\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-quality-ecd-areas</span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure: 3</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Quality early childhood development areas</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Learning through play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Slideline\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: How children learn through play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Through play children create new things, solve problems and form an understanding of the world</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Curious</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children are curious by nature.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-02</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Explore</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: The child’s curiosity drives them to explore through play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-03</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Discover</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When the child explores through play, they discover new things and learn.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-04</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Fun</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: The child experiences exploring and learning as fun.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-05</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Repeat</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children (and adults) like to repeat activities that are fun.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-06</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Mastery</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Repeating fun activities helps the child to master their skills.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-07</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Confidence</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: A child who is mastering new skills feels confident.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-wheel-08</span>

<span dir="ltr">TItle: New challenge</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: A confident child will try new challenges.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Slideline\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">What children learn through play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Play develops all the skills that children need to be ready for school and life.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-when-children-play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure: 5</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When children play they are:</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Age-appropriate play</span>

<span dir="ltr">As children get older they have more interests and skills. This means that their play gets more complicated.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure: 6</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: At this age I enjoy…</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

| <span dir="ltr">0 - 12 months</span> | <span dir="ltr">1 - 2 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">2 -3 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">3 - 4 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">4 - 5 years</span> | <span dir="ltr">I enjoy:</span>                          |
|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Discovering</span>                       |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Exploring</span>                         |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Interacting with adults</span>           |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Moving</span>                            |
| <span dir="ltr">•</span>             | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Practicing</span>                        |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Imitating</span>                         |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Creating</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Stacking and building</span>             |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Filling and emptying things</span>       |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Pushing things together</span>           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Pulling things apart</span>              |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Hiding and finding</span>                |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Climbing and jumping</span>              |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Talking</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Asking questions</span>                  |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Interacting with children</span>         |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Testing</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>          | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Matching</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Dancing and singing</span>               |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Sharing</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Organising</span>                        |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Pretending</span>                        |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Playing simple games</span>              |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Problem solving</span>                   |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Running</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Understanding</span>                     |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Choosing</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr"></span>              | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr"></span>           | <span dir="ltr"></span>            | <span dir="ltr">•</span>           | <span dir="ltr">Playing with language and numbers</span> |

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Figure 7 Slideline table, pull from Look and Feel and MS to see if tables can go in slidelines, if not add to artwork brief\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Outdoor free play</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Free play** has fewer rules, which leaves more room for self-discovery, imagination and creativity. Watch the video below to see the benefits and possibilities of outdoor free play.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 3: Outdoor free play\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Playground safety</span>

### <span dir="ltr">How to keep a safe playground</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Follow these guidelines to ensure that your **playground** is safe:</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Check clothes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Remove necklaces</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Take off unzipped jackets, clothes with drawstrings and scarfs</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children must wear sports shoes with rubber soles or no shoes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children must wear a hat if there is no shade</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children must wear a raincoat if it is raining</span>

<span dir="ltr">Go over rules</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Take turns and share</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">No pushing, hitting or shoving</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Respect for others, themselves, and their space</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Good manners</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Clearly show where they may play and with what</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">No eating or drinking while playing</span>

<span dir="ltr">Look up</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is the area age appropriate?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Nothing higher than 1.5m</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Nothing closer than 2m from each other</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Are there broken or rusted parts on equipment?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is there anything wet or slippery?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is all play equipment secured to the ground?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Are there any small spaces where children can get stuck?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Look down</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is the area clear of objects that are too small for the age group?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that there are no poisonous or dangerous plants nearby</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that there is no litter or broken glass</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that no animals or dangerous insects are in the crawl spaces</span>

<span dir="ltr">Stay close</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stay engaged</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Do not use your mobile phone while children are playing</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Watch out for children who are not watching where they are going</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Watch out for any dangerous actions</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-playground-injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 7</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Common playground injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-age-group-injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 8</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Age group most likely to be injured</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-equipment-injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 9</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Equipment causes of injuries</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Playground Safety Checklist</span>

<span dir="ltr">South Africa has the following safety guidelines in place for Early Childhood Development Centres:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">An outdoor play area of adequate size must be provided for use by every child on the premises including an outdoor play area of a minimum of at least 5m\<sup\>2\</sup\> per child on the premises and separate play areas for children between the ages of 0‐2 years and those between the ages of 3‐6 years.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The premises must be surrounded by a fence constructed by an approved material and a lockable gate to prevent a child from leaving the premises unnoticed as well as to prevent unauthorized entry by the public.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ponds, pits and or other hazards in any garden or external play area must be fenced off to ensure the safety of children. No poisonous or harmful plants may be grown on the premises.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Safety Checklist</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">Fall Height and Fall Zones</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the possible fall height less than 1.5m from all pieces of equipment?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is there a minimum clearance of at least 2m separating each piece of equipment?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Safety Surfacing</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is there impact-absorbing material under all pieces of equipment over 500mm in height? (e.g. sand, bark, mulch or ground rubber)</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the surfacing well maintained? (e.g. at least 300mm depth of loose fill material)</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Design Hazards</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment free of possible spaces a child could get their head stuck such as openings between 80mm and 230mm?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is all moving equipment free of any potential trapping and pinching points?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are there sturdy guard and handrails, appropriate to a child’s hand and grip size? Any platform higher than 30cm is required to have a rail.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Does the larger equipment prevent possible climbing on the outside of the structure? No structures may be higher than 1, 5 metres.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Shading</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is all equipment suitably shaded, if no natural shade applies?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Maintenance</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment’s frame stable and free from movement?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment free from rust, cracks or broken items?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are timber items on the equipment free from rotten or splintered wood?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is all equipment free of protruding fixings and sharp edges?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of loose stones or gravel?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of trip hazards?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of tree branches or anything sharp at children’s eye level?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Slide</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the slide securely anchored in the ground?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Does the slide have built up sides?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the slide steps have a guard rail?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Swings</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Are the swings securely anchored to the ground?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the swings for children under 6 years of age have chair-like back support?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the tyre swings have drainage holes to let out rain water?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area under the swings filled with sand?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Sandpit</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the sandpit placed in the shade or have a roof for sun protection?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the depth of the sand pit at least 40cm?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the sandpit filled with river sand?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Playground</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the playground enclosed and gated?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is there enough space in the play area for children to play?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are all garden tools, equipment and chemicals locked away?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area free of all poisonous or thorny plants?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area free of any litter or dangerous objects lying around, such as glass, tins and rusty nails?</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">How to design your natural playground</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">For this step you first need to understand how children play. When adults design **playgrounds**, there is a danger that we often think from our own point of view. This means that we provide play spaces that are reminiscent of our own experiences or what we’ve seen in other schools. We must also remember that the more expensive option isn’t always the best option.</span>

<span dir="ltr">We need to think and design from the child’s point of view. What do children need to develop holistically? How do children play at their best?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Design a playground for the children - not for yourself!</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-playground-concept</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Natural Playgrounds vs Traditional Playgrounds</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">**Natural Playground**s are different to traditional playgrounds in a number of ways.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

| <span dir="ltr">Traditional Playground</span>                                                                           | <span dir="ltr">Natural Playground</span>                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span dir="ltr">Expensive to install</span>                                                                             | <span dir="ltr">Can be very cheap or even free to create</span>                                                                    |
| <span dir="ltr">Needs maintenance and surveillance</span>                                                               | <span dir="ltr">Needs maintenance and storage</span>                                                                               |
| <span dir="ltr">Focuses on gross-motor play (running, jumping, sliding, and climbing)</span>                            | <span dir="ltr">Accommodates all types of play (gross-motor, fine motor, social etc)</span>                                        |
| <span dir="ltr">Fixed equipment is intended to be used in a certain way</span>                                          | <span dir="ltr">**Loose parts**, pathways, sand, water, trees and plants can be reimagined and redesigned by children daily</span> |
| <span dir="ltr">Become boring over time</span>                                                                          | <span dir="ltr">Become more engaging over time as the children’s skills improve</span>                                             |
| <span dir="ltr">Are inflexible to children’s ideas</span>                                                               | <span dir="ltr">Children can build their ideas in the real world</span>                                                            |
| <span dir="ltr">Purpose is physical fitness and so they are not always accessible for differently-abled children</span> | <span dir="ltr">Play can be imaginative and is accessible to all children</span>                                                   |
| <span dir="ltr">Level of risk taking is predetermined by equipment</span>                                               | <span dir="ltr">Children can take risks at their ability level in a variety of situations</span>                                   |

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Natural playground ideas</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Layout</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Make different play spaces for different kinds of activities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Spread play spaces throughout the playground ‐ don’t squash them all together in only one area</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Play spaces can be separated by paths</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Incorporate the natural elements (trees or rocks) as part of play spaces. If you do not have trees, plant some for future children. It can be a project where you involve the kids to help protect and water the trees. Find out from your closest nursery what trees grows fast and make a limited mess to clean up.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Well‐designed borders that demarcate or separate play spaces can offer as much (and sometimes more) play value than the play space itself. Wherever possible, incorporate natural borders (boulders, stumps, logs, shrubs etc.) of varying sizes and diverse materials.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Place larger or more popular play spaces (climbing structures, sand play areas) where they are easy to supervise. Make sure the supervisor can see all areas where children can play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Natural Elements</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">If you don’t have a “hill” in your playground, consider creating one and covering it with grass. This provides opportunities for climbing and rolling.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Consider a small vegetable garden where children are involved in the planting and watering. Research shows that children are more likely to eat vegetables that they helped to grow themselves.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make a “river bed” with stones. Select pebbles and stones that are an age-appropriate size.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Having a “table” or flat item in the sand play area encourages children not to carry the sand away from the sandpit.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Placing rocks and boulders in the playground provides challenging routes, sitting places or climbing opportunities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Trees and shrubs can be used as windbreaks, to provide shade and moderate the temperature, reduce glare, separate play spaces and can be educational tools. Trees that shed their leaves can block out the sun in summer but allow the warmth in winter sun. Plants can also be used to create hidden spaces.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Slideline\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Different types of play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Different types of play all fit together to form an environment of holistic development.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-01</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Gross Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves movement helps to strengthen the body and develop gross motor skills. When children crawl through a tunnel, climb a tree or run around they learn body coordination, spatial awareness, and to enjoy exercise.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-02</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Fine Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves using the hands and fingers will develop hand eye coordination and fine motor control.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-03</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Construction Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves building something with loose parts. When children balance blocks on each other, build a “house” or create new roads in the playground they learn how to solve problems, use their senses, and how shapes fit together.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-04</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Drama Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Dramatic play is when children make up stories and act them out. This “pretend” play improves literacy and reading skills. When children play “house” or “teacher”, pretend to be an animal or listen to a story they learn how to communicate and take turns.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-05</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Music Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When given the opportunity to create music, children develop their creativity. When children play real or pretend musical instruments, sings songs, and dance they learn to use their hands and fingers, about sounds, rhythm and tempo, and gain self confidence.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-06</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Art Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: When given the opportunity to create art, children develop their creativity. When children draw, paint or scribble or play with mud and clay they learn about different textures, cause and effect, and to explore and experiment with their environment.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-07</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Nature Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Any play that involves exploring nature. This can be watching insects, planting plants, balancing on a rock or playing with feathers, leaves and seeds.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-08</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Water and Sand Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Water and sand offer opportunities to dig, pour, sift, scoop and build. This helps to develop big and small muscles, stimulates the senses, and allow children to learn math and science principles.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-09</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Solitary Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children need to be able to spend time alone if they want to. It is important to provide spaces where they can do this.</span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-play-type-10</span>

<span dir="ltr">Title: Sensory Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Children develop sensory abilities including sight, smell, touch and sound as they play. All forms of play include sensory input. It’s important to provide your play environment with a variety of play equipment and loose parts to help children explore their sensory skills.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Slideline\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Loose Parts</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Loose Parts are materials with no specific set of directions that can be used alone or combined with other materials. They can be moved, carried, combined, redesigned, lined up, and taken apart and put back together in multiple ways.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">When you are wondering what will make a good loose part, ask yourself the following questions:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is it flexible or sturdy enough that it be used and reused in different ways without breaking or becoming dangerous?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is it something you can give to children, to do whatever they want with, even if that means finishing it or destroying it?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Is it something that you can easily collect after playtime or something you can leave out all the time?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The list of possible loose parts is endless but can include:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Wooden coins (slices of wood about 3cm thick)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Logs of different heights and widths</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Chalk</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Cardboard boxes of various sizes and shapes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Leaves, feathers, shells or pine cones</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stones, pebbles or rocks</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Milk and bread crates</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Wooden pallets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Buckets, tubes and plastic gutters</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Funnels and hosepipes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Nets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Tyres of different shapes and sizes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Steering wheels</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Computer keyboards</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Old clothes for dressing up</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts should be easy to use and easy to put away. They can be stored in containers, sheds or open boxes against the side of the playground. Old suitcases or child-sized trolleys and wheelbarrows can be used for transporting loose parts to and from the storage place and encourage children to keep the playground tidy. Many loose parts are unlikely to be tampered with or stolen and can be left out depending on local circumstances.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Size is important. Large loose parts can be quicker to tidy away. Small loose parts like cones and shells can easily get scattered outside. Having them as part of the outdoor environment in a cone pit or using shells as mulch in raised beds and containers means less gathering. Synthetic small items are difficult to tidy and could impact the environment if left outside.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Think about how materials and resources will be dried on rainy days. Quick dry materials such as tarps and organza can be easier to manage than cotton‐based materials for den building and dressing up.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Section 2: Engage</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Involving the community</span>

<span dir="ltr">Community members are experts on what is happening in their surrounding area.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include defintion\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Communities are not just groups of people that stay in the same area, they are also a group with a common interest. Community members are in the best position to identify and understand the problems and needs of their community. They can bring in different cultures and habits. The more diverse the people you involve; the more ideas, perspectives, and **resources** become available to your project.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-community-groups</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">A few examples to consider to involve:</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Parents and children** can contribute with labour, assist with funding, and help mobilise the community. Children have great ideas and fantasies for their dream **natural playground**.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Community members** can serve on committees, give and collect information, participate in surveys, participate on task teams, distribute flyers, promote the project and help with some of the planned activities.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Social workers** and members of the Department of Social Development can help you understand the developmental and play needs of children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Community-based organisations (CBO’s and NGO’s)** can advise on strategies, help facilitate meetings, share experience and expertise, serve on committees, help implement plans, help you identify service providers and existing projects. For example, organisations or facilities for people with disabilities can give their views on developing playgrounds that are inclusive and accessible.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Businesses** can assist with products and services, serve on planning committees, and can benefit by displaying their marketing material in the playground or at community events.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Faith-based organisations and churches** can provide insights into the community, act as mentors, and offer support and volunteers.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Schools** can provide spaces for meetings, workshops or events, allow talks at the school, put up posters, and encourage teachers to participate.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Local radio and media** can assist in promoting and supporting events by creating awareness and helping you communicate with the public.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Clinics** can assist with the input on the health and nutritional needs of children when active.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Philanthropists** often there are individuals in a community that are willing to invest in the growth of its members. These individuals can offer ideas and financial assistance.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">How to handle community participation</span>

<span dir="ltr">We are often tempted to go ahead and do the work on a project ourselves because it can be so much faster. Getting everyone to work together takes a little bit more effort at the start, it may even be slower, but the more we involve people in our projects, the better the results and impact will be. The community will have a stake or interest in the playground and each community member will bring their influence, expertise and resources to the table to build something far greater than each could have done on their own. And finally, by including others, they will be empowered to create similar projects.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">To increase the level of community participation in your project, work through the four phases below using the goals, messages and tools as a guide for each phase.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure 13</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: How to increase the level of community participation</span>

<span dir="ltr">Source: Inspired by the Engagement Continuum of the International Association for Public Participation</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<table><thead><tr class="header"><th><span dir="ltr"></span></th><th><strong><span dir="ltr">Inform</span></strong></th><th><strong><span dir="ltr">Consult</span></strong></th><th><strong><span dir="ltr">Involve</span></strong></th><th><strong><span dir="ltr">Collaborate</span></strong></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr class="odd"><td><strong><span dir="ltr">Goal</span></strong></td><td><span dir="ltr">To give the community helpful information.</span></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">To gather the opinion of the</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">community on</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">the problem and possible solutions.</span></p></td><td><span dir="ltr">To work with the community to make sure that their views are considered and understood.</span></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">To partner with</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">the community</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">to assess the</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">problem and develop solutions.</span></p></td></tr><tr class="even"><td><strong><span dir="ltr">Messages</span></strong></td><td><span dir="ltr">We will keep you informed.</span></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">We will keep you informed,</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">acknowledge your concerns and give you feedback on decisions.</span></p></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">We will work</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">with you and the results will reflect how your input influenced decisions.</span></p></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">We will get</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">advice and</span></p><p><span dir="ltr">community-specific solutions from you and implement them with your help.</span></p></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td><strong><span dir="ltr">Tools</span></strong></td><td><ul><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Fact sheets</span></p></blockquote></li><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Posters</span></p></blockquote></li><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Websites</span></p></blockquote></li><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Radio talks</span></p></blockquote></li></ul></td><td><ul><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Focus groups</span></p></blockquote></li><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Surveys</span></p></blockquote></li><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Public</span></p></blockquote></li></ul></td><td><ul><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Workshops</span></p></blockquote></li></ul></td><td><ul><li><blockquote><p><strong><span dir="ltr">Participatory workshops</span></strong></p></blockquote></li><li><blockquote><p><span dir="ltr">Task team membership</span></p></blockquote></li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 4: How to handle community participation\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Facilitating community meetings</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Get the right people</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Before you approach potential **partners**, make sure that you are clear on exactly what you are doing and what you want them to do. Consider writing your request on a short letter to take with you; it will show potential partners that the project is organised and professional. “Sell” the project to potential partners by helping them understand what the need is in the community, what your plans are, how they will be addressed, and the benefits of partnering. Be specific and clear on what exactly it is you want them to do.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Preparation for the meeting</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Invite participants with a letter that includes a summary of your idea, date, time, length, and location of the meeting</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Select a meeting place and familiarise yourself beforehand.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The ideal meeting place is easily accessible, has refreshments, toilet facilities, and enough space to comfortably accommodate all participants</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Once you have decided on your facilitation methods, check that you have all equipment required such as pens and paper</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The most important tool is you! See that you are neatly dressed and groomed, use movement wisely, and engage your audience with gestures and facial expressions</span>

### <span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Use facilitation methods that require active participation</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Activities should be participant‐centred and participatory such as group discussions and exercises</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Encourage feedback</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Limit the presentation of information to mini lectures</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Provide paper and pen for note taking, and exercises</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Provide participants with the relevant materials to facilitate group discussions</span>

### <span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Brainstorm</span>

<span dir="ltr">A brainstorm is a rapid‐fire, creative thinking tool used to generate ideas. It is based on a session of uncensored thinking where no one criticises each other’s ideas during the process. It is often used when ideas for a novel need to be generated. You can do it with sticky notes or collect all ideas on a flipchart.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Facilitators role</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Focus the group on the set agenda</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Protect group members from personal attack</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Remain non‐defensive and accept feedback</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">During the meeting</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Arrive early to allow time to set up the room and make last minute preparations</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Introduce yourself to the group and briefly outline the aim of the meeting and the agenda</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Follow the agenda and designated time frames to the extent possible</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Avoid exceeding the amount of time allotted for the meeting</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Provide clear instructions and time frames for activities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Demonstrate your knowledge and enthusiasm for the subject matter</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Sessions lasting for two or more hours should include a formal break</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">After the meeting, thank participants and summarise key points in a written report</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Icebreakers and energiser</span>

<span dir="ltr">An icebreaker is any activity at the beginning of the meeting that is designed to get people to know each other better, so they can work together more effectively. Energizers are games that are used when you notice the energy levels of the group getting low. They will usually involve physical movement.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Splitting in small groups</span>

<span dir="ltr">When you want everyone to participate, splitting a big group into smaller groups might be a good idea. Each smaller group either has the same task or different tasks. You will see that you will get a lot done in a short time and it is a good way to discuss values and beliefs or take a vote where necessary.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Create a supportive environment</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">call group members by name</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">each person’s questions and viewpoints should be heard</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">be courteous and patient, do not ridicule or belittle people</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">be encouraging and affirm effort and progress</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">ensure that participants are comfortable</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Section 3: Assess</span>

## <span dir="ltr">What is a needs assessment?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">A **needs assessment** is a starting point for generating new ideas. It is best to do a needs assessment at the start of a project.</span>

<span dir="ltr">A playground needs assessment will give you information on:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">What your playground offers at the moment</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The views of the children that use the playground</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The views of other community members with experience of children and play</span>

<span dir="ltr">There are many reasons for doing a needs assessment. A few of them are:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">To collect information about the need (playground)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">To ensure we do not build a playground or parts of a playground that is not needed or wanted by the community</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">To help you focus on the needs of the children and not on what we, the adults, want to do</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">To uncover things that you might have missed</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">To test assumptions and reduce the risk of doing more harm than good</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-needs-assessment</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">The playground needs assessment tool is the perfect starting point to get community members involved. If people are consulted about the problem, they are more likely to contribute to and participate in the solutions.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">How to do a needs assessment</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">To solve a problem, we first need to understand what the solution is. A playground **needs assessment** gathers information about the “road” we need to take to create the **natural playground** we want for our children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">In short, it is finding out what needs to be done in order to move from where we are to where we want to be. Watch the video to find out how to conduct a needs assessment for your natural playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 5: How to do a needs assessment\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Tools 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7 can be used to help you conduct a needs assessment for your playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Section 4: Act</span>

## <span dir="ltr">What is a playground action plan?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Action plans turn dreams into reality. A playground **action plan** is a tool that shows your community and **partners** that you are serious about getting things done and helps you make sure you don’t overlook something as well as be efficient with **resources**. An action plan can be as detailed as you wish to make it. The level of detail will be determined by what you want to use it for.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">A good action plan is:</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Complete** ‐ make sure you include all the activities you need to do to achieve your **objective**</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Clear** ‐ makes it very clear who will do what by when</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Anticipates risks** ‐ make sure that you consider what would limit implementation of the plan and plan strategies to deal with this</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Considers communication** ‐ make sure that you think of everyone that needs to know something about the implementation, what they need to know and how will you get the information to them</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">A good action plan will answer:</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Why** are we doing this? What is our vision and mission?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**What** are the objectives we want to achieve with these activities?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**How** will the activities be conducted?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Who** will do the activities?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**When** will the activities be completed?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**What** do you need in terms of human resources and material resources to do the activities?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**What** risks or challenges do we anticipate and what will we do to address them?</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Who** needs to know what about the project?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">The importance of budgeting</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The best way to stick to your **budget** is to have one.</span>

<span dir="ltr">The budget shows the amount of money you plan to raise and spend for the purpose of establishing a **natural playground**. If your **ECD** centre is registered as an NGO or NPO you have the responsibility to be transparent with the money you spend.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">A budget is needed for planning</span>

<span dir="ltr">Budgeting helps you to plan and monitor how much money is spent. It helps us to think before we buy things, because if we do not stick to the budget, we will not be able to do what we planned.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">A budget is needed for fundraising</span>

<span dir="ltr">The budget is an important part of the proposal sent to potential donors. It gives a detailed account of what you plan to do with the money or goods received and what results will be achieved.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">A budget is needed for monitoring</span>

<span dir="ltr">You need **resources** to implement your plans. If you do not spend your resources as planned, it will affect your ability to complete the project.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">A budget is needed for accuracy</span>

<span dir="ltr">A budget will help you consider all the little things that will require money, such as:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop costs: when you invite people to help you think in a workshop, you will have to provide refreshments and lunch if the workshop takes the whole day. Remember that most of us have a sandwich for lunch so don’t waste money by trying to impress people with expensive lunches.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Travel and subsistence costs: even if you get materials donated, you may have to go and pick it up. If it is far, you have to plan for refreshment.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Materials and assembling: in addition to the actual material to build or make an item, you will need things like screws, sandpaper and cleaning materials to maintain the playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Labour costs: if you can not find volunteers with the right tools, you may have to hire tools or workmen with the right tools and expertise for building certain aspects of the playground.</span>

> <span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Write a playground action plan</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Vision</span>

<span dir="ltr">Vision is the dream you have for your natural playground. Your vision communicates what you believe the right playground will do for the children that use it. This will make your beliefs about play clear to the staff, children, parents, volunteers, and the wider community. This information was gathered in Tool 1: Partner Finder.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Objectives</span>

<span dir="ltr">Objectives describes what you want to achieve. It describes how you plan to address the gap between where you are now and where you want to be . Twelve priority objectives were identified in the Visioning Workshop and each of these objectives were formulated as smart objectives in Tool 7: Formulating Objectives.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Activities</span>

<span dir="ltr">You can use as much detail for the activities as you think is necessary to run your project smoothly. Always remember to identify the following; what do you plan to do and what activities are you planning to do to achieve the objective? Who is responsible for each aspect of the activity and seeing that it is completed within a set time frame? Activities and timelines were identified when the objectives were formulated in Tool 8: Resource Plan.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Resources</span>

<span dir="ltr">What do you need in terms of human resources and material resources to do the activities? You must identify what you already have, what you still need, and what this will cost. Use Tool 4: Resource Inventory to assign resources to each activity.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Risks and challenges</span>

<span dir="ltr">We know the reality is that things do not always work out as we plan. If we plan for things that may go wrong, we are prepared to react quickly and take action to avoid or minimise the impact. It is important to identify what risks or challenges are anticipated and if a challenge is encountered, what will you do to address it.</span>

<span dir="ltr">For instance frequent electricity interruptions will make it difficult to do the administration necessary for the project. We can anticipate this challenge by buying generators or laptops that run on batteries, if possible, or identify tasks we could do during electricity interruptions. Risks and challenges and possible solutions were identified in Tool 6: Risk Benefit Assessment.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Communication planning</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">We could have the best **action plan** possible but if we do not communicate it clearly, it will just remain a plan on paper. For each activity you need to consider what needs to be communicated about the project to who and in what way.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Monitoring implementation</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Your **monitoring** plan will help you to track that your activities are implemented as planned. Your monitoring plan was formulated in Tool 9: Monitoring Summary.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Section 5: Monitor and Evaluate</span>

## <span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">What is monitoring and evaluation?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Monitoring** and **evaluation** is an important part of every initiative and project as it allows you to track the progress of your initial idea and document results and success. It is also called outcome-based measurement.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Outcome-based measurement is a universal approach that strengthens accountability and encourages clarity about what your project is doing and what it is changing. Outcome-based measurements follow a logical chain of events that link resources to activities, activities to products or results, and results to outcomes and impact. Each step of the project process is linked with the next step, as demonstrated in Figure 13.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Monitoring and evaluation cannot be done at the end of a project, it needs to be designed as part of the chain of events when **objectives** are formulated.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-monitoring-flow</span>

<span dir="ltr">Figure 13</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Once you have decided that your approach to play needs to change, follow these steps in the creation of your natural playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Efficiency** determines the extent to which human and material resources are well used. It tells us if the input is worth the output it achieves.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">**Effectiveness** assesses the extent to which a project achieves its objective. It tells us if the input is worth the output it achieves.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">**Impact** determines whether or not we are making a difference to the problem we are trying to solve. It tells us if the project is producing change.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">**Sustainability** estimates the extent to which changes are likely to continue after the project ends. It tells us if the changes are lasting.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">How to approach monitoring and evaluation</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Monitoring</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Are we getting where we want to be?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">In [<span class="underline">Section 1</span>](http://01.html#the-importance-of-play), we saw that play is important for early childhood development and that it offers many varied benefits to the child; in the short term but also and especially in the long term. The ultimate goal of our project is that we want to offer a play environment or space where children can develop the skills, habits and attitudes that they will need for the rest of their lives.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Monitoring and evaluating the project helps us to make sure we reach our goal of having a **natural playground**. Good intentions are not enough. We want results that will lead to the achievement of our goal.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Once the children start using the natural playground, it is important to keep monitoring and evaluating on a regular basis to ensure that the playground is a safe and exciting play space. Use Tool 9 as a guide for monitoring the playground and Tool 10 to monitor that the playground stays inline with safety standards. Tool 11 helps to monitor that the playground is maintained so that the performance and safety of the equipment in your playground remains at a high standard.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">We want to show that our project has made a real change in children’s lives and that any donations of money or **resources** were not wasted. If there are places that children don’t use or like, we need to adapt and change it to keep on offering play opportunities that address the holistic developmental needs of the children. Tool 12 can be used to evaluate if the opportunities are there that will have a positive impact on children’s development.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Evaluation</span>

<span dir="ltr">Monitoring is often about facts and figures, things you can count and see. It is relatively easy to do if you work in a systematic, organised manner.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">When you evaluate you make judgements. You weigh the facts that you have analysed against a standard. Choose indicators of evaluation by considering your activities and outputs.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The standard that you use to judge or weigh, is determined by a combination of</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Theory & Research</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Societal norms (including laws)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Practice experience (informed opinion)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Your personal beliefs, attitudes and views</span>

<span dir="ltr">See Tool 12 for examples of the types of evaluations you can do.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Evaluation is a little more tricky than monitoring. It helps if you have experience in evaluating projects when you do it. If you do not have a person on your team that is familiar with identifying indicators for evaluating, try to get someone from your community or from a local NGO to assist you. On the upside, evaluations usually happen further apart than monitoring, generally every three to six months and at the end of a project.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Toolbox</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tools at a glance</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 1: Partner Finder</span>

<span dir="ltr">Find out who cares about your community or school by defining who has an interest or investment in it.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 2: Playground Map</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore how people experience the playground by mapping the playground and how they use it.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 3: Playground Dreams</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore what you want to include in a playground by defining opportunities and activities for all types of plays and ability levels.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 4: Resource Inventory</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore what resources are available by listing resources in different categories.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 5: Issue Finder</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore the legal and practical issues of creating a natural playground by examining policies, regulations and access to resources.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 6: Risk Benefit Assessment</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore the risks and benefits of playing with loose parts by weighing the likelihood of dangers against the potential benefits.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 7: Formulating Objectives</span>

<span dir="ltr">Formulate smart objectives by describing exactly what you want to achieve.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 8: Resource Plan</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that everything you have planned can be completed on time and on budget by creating a resource plan that is easy to understand.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 9: Monitoring Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that everything you planned gets done by monitoring implementation.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 10: Monitoring Safety</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that the playground is a safe place by monitoring safety standards.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 11: Monitoring Maintenance</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that your natural playground remains safe by monitoring maintenance issues.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tool 12: Evaluate Results</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that the natural playground offers a variety of opportunities by evaluating it against developmental play needs.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 1: Partner Finder</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Find out who cares about your community or school by defining who has an interest or investment in it.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">When do you use the Partner Finder tool?</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Communities are not just groups of people that stay in the same area, they can also be groups with a common interest like a school or workplace or people that live elsewhere but have an interest in the area like business owners, organisations or government departments.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Defining your community helps you to decide who should be involved or can contribute to your natural playground Needs Assessment with manpower, resources, perspectives, experience, expertise, and insights.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">You can use the Partner Finder at the start of a project to help you define who the **stakeholders** are in your community.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Who can use the Partner Finder tool?</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop Facilitators</span>

**<span dir="ltr">How do you use the Partner Finder tool?</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Work individually or as a group to come up with as many names as possible to complete each column. The more people you are that work on the worksheet, the more ideas you will have. Remember that there are no right or wrong answers, just come up with as many ideas as possible. When you plan, you can decide who to use or not to use. The next step after you’ve completed the Partner Finder tool is to appoint someone to get the contact details for each of the people you listed.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Partner Finder</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who know something about child development and play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: Social workers, academics, occupational therapists, nurses, doctors, teachers, psychologists, etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who are affected by the lack of a playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: Children, community members, local government, school principals , youth workers, local businesses, etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who come from different cultures.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: Culture, nationality, language, interest groups etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who have special needs or different abilities.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: People with disabilities, old people, youth, children, women, etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Organisations that work with children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: NGOs, CBOs, faith-based organisations, shelters, schools.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">If you prefer you can **download the worksheet** \[AW-partner-finder\] and print it out.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 2: Playground Map</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore how people experience the playground by mapping the playground and how they use it.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

*<span dir="ltr">This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**.</span>*

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Playground Map tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">The playground map tool is great to use when making improvements to an existing playground. It allows you to clearly identify what you want the new playground to offer. People’s perception of the existing playground can provide information that cannot be obtained any other way. It can reveal areas children avoid or use often, areas that are important or areas that can be developed.</span>

<span dir="ltr">The playground map is a cheap and easy tool to use with young or old. The only requirement is that you have a facilitator and someone to take notes. The playground map helps you get perspective on the existing playground, how children use and access resources and where they prefer to be.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Playground Map tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Playground Map tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">To use the Playground Map tool you will need a venue that is close to the playground, a diverse group of at least ten to fifteen people, large sheets of blank paper, and coloured markers or crayons. Additionally, it could be useful to have tables and chairs for participants to use while creating their maps (younger participants can use the floor if necessary) and masking tape to stick the completed maps to the wall during the final discussion.</span>

<span dir="ltr">The facilitator should provide their workshop with the required equipment and follow the outlined steps. The exercise should take approximately one hour in total.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Playground Map</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Step 1: Frame and explain the exercise</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explain the exercise to participants by telling them that we are going to be drawing our playground so that we can better understand what it offers and what it’s problems are. Assure them that this is a fun activity, that there is no right or wrong way to complete the task, and that the groups are made up of many people because we need many different ideas and perspectives. Divide participants into groups of five to six people and give each group a piece of paper and set of markers or crayons. This step should take five minutes.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Step 2: Establish a starting point</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ask the group as a whole what the centre of the playground is. This is usually the most used or most prominent area. Once the group agrees, ask each smaller group to make a mark in the middle of their paper representing that central point of the playground. Next, ask them to mark the fence or boundary line of the preschool or playground area. This step should take five minutes.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Step 3: Walk about and draw playground</span>

<span dir="ltr">Once they have completed step 2, participants are to go for a walk about the playground and to continue to draw their map using the following prompts:</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Draw the main roads going past the school or playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Draw any water, trees, rocks or paths in the playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Draw the current playground equipment. Participants can draw simple symbols as long as it is clear what is what.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Once the general map and layout of the playground is established, participants should map out their playground concerns and opportunities using the following prompts:</span>

> <span dir="ltr"></span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Mark with a blue dot places where there is playground equipment and write the name of the equipment.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Mark with a green dot places where there is natural resources and write what they are (tree, plants, or rocks etc).</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Mark with a black dot places where children play and write which type of play and the approximate age of the children who use each area.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Mark with a yellow dot places where nothing seems to be happening.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Mark with a pink dot any items that cannot be moved such as building, big trees, taps, or fences.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Mark with a red star any areas or aspects of the playground that pose any dangers or concerns and make a note of what you observed.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Once each group has completed their map they should return to the venue to discuss their findings. This step should take fifteen minutes.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Step 4: Feedback to the group</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ask each group to send a representative to give feedback and talk through their map. If possible, stick each map on the wall so that they are easy for all to see. This step should take fifteen minutes.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Step 5: Group discussion</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ask the following questions to the group as a whole (and any other questions that might arise). It is important that either the workshop facilitator or a helper takes notes on what is discussed.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">What is most obviously the same in all of the maps?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">What is most obviously different in all of the maps?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">What have you learned about the playground by drawing the map?</span>

<span dir="ltr"> </span>

<span dir="ltr">This final step should take twenty minutes.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 3: Playground Dreams</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore what you want to include in a playground by defining opportunities and activities for all types of plays and ability levels.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

*<span dir="ltr">This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**.</span>*

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Playground Dreams tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">You should use the Playground Dreams tool at the start of a project to help you define what you want to include in a playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">A good natural playground offers opportunities for all types of play. Use [<span class="underline">Figure 11</span>](http://01.html#figure-11) as guide on the different types of play to include in your playground. The playground should cater to all the senses (see, hear, touch, smell, and taste) and have activities and opportunities for users of all ages, abilities, and developmental stages.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Playground Dreams tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Playground Dreams tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Work through the tool and come up with as many ideas as possible to complete each block. In each block, write down what activity or opportunity you would like in your playground for that type of play. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more ideas you will have.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Remember that there are no right or wrong answers. Just come up with as many ideas as possible. When you plan, you can decide what to use or not to use. Make sure to include activities and opportunities for children younger than two years and for children with disabilities.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Playground Dreams</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Gross Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Fine Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Sensory Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Drama Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Music Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Art Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Nature Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Sand Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Water Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Construction Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Solitary Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Loose Parts Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">It is not always possible to fill every block with play ideas and many ideas will overlap across types. If you’re stuck you can always look at [<span class="underline">Section 1</span>](http://01.html#figure-11) to refresh your memory on the different types of play and examples of each.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 4: Resource Inventory</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore what **resources** are available by listing resources in different categories.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

*<span dir="ltr">This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**.</span>*

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Resource Inventory tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">You should use the Resource Inventory tool at the start of a project to help you define what resources you have available for each different type of play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Any space will already have resources that can be used, even if it is only the soil in the yard. By listing the resources into categories, you may find that you have a lot of resources for one type of play but nothing for others.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">It is a good idea to complete Tool 3 and Tool 4 at the same time to get an idea of what resources you have and what you will need in the future.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Resource Inventory tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Resource Inventory tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Work through the tool and come up with as many ideas as possible to complete each block. In each block, write down what resources you already have that can be used to create an activity or opportunity for that type of play. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more information you will have.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Resource Inventory</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Gross Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Fine Motor Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Sensory Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Drama Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Music Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Art Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Nature Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Sand Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Water Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Construction Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Solitary Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Loose Parts Play</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 5: Issue Finder</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore the legal and practical issues of creating a natural playground by examining policies, regulations and access to **resources**.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

*<span dir="ltr">This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**.</span>*

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">See [<span class="underline">Section 1</span>](http://01.html#playground-safety) for playground safety regulations and a useful checklist to guide you through this tool.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Issue Finder tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">The Issue Finder tool helps you to plan for the practical implementation of a playground that meets the safety regulations and standards prescribed by your local authorities.</span>

<span dir="ltr">This tool is designed to be used together with your local guidelines and laws that exist to ensure inclusion and safety in the playground. While we want to offer an exciting playground for children, we want to make sure that we have considered the guidelines and laws that will help to reduce the risk of injury to the children who will be playing in it.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Any plan has practical issues that will affect how we implement it. Considering this in advance will prevent us from getting surprised, discouraged or overwhelmed when we start to build our playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Issue Finder tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Issue Finder tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Work through the tool and answer each question as best you can. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more ideas you will have.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Remember that there are no right or wrong answers. Just come up with as many ideas as possible. When you plan, you can decide what to use or not to use.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Issue Finder</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Age groups** Different age groups have different developmental needs. How will your playground address this?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Capacity** How many children can be using the space and equipment?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Zones** How much space is there between equipment?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Equipment** Does the equipment meet the requirements in terms of height and design?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Installation and Maintenance** Will this be done by staff, volunteers, or paid for?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Resources** What do you need to build the playground? Don’t forget transporting the new equipment to the playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Other** Are there any other rules, regulations, or issues that need to be considered?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 6: Risk Benefit Assessment</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Explore the risks and benefits of playing with **loose parts** by weighing the likelihood of dangers against the potential benefits.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

*<span dir="ltr">This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**.</span>*

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">We should encourage opportunities for children to define and take their own risks, but it is of the utmost important that adults are not negligent and do not allow for unacceptable dangers and injuries.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Risk Benefit Assessment tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">The Risk Benefit Assessment tool helps you to decide if the benefit outweighs the risks when introducing loose parts play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Childhood is an ongoing process of trial and error with the potential for achievement, but also the certainty of accidents. Children would never learn to walk, climb stairs or ride a bicycle unless they were strongly motivated to take the risk of injury.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Taking risks is how we learn what we are capable of, what we can achieve and how to survive failure. Opportunities for risk in play are very important, if we want our children to develop into brave, confident, competent, and resilient people. When we select loose parts for play, we are offering opportunities for children to create and experience new kinds of risk.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Risks Benefit Assessment tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Risk Benefit Assessment tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Work through the tool and come up with as many ideas as possible to complete each block. For each group of loose parts, write down the potential physical and emotional benefits for the child, the potential risks of injury, and how best to reduce those risks without limiting the benefits. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more information you will have.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">When determining the risks for each group, order them according to the likelihood of them happening. Put risks that are likely to happen daily first, followed by risks likely to happen weekly or monthly and lastly put risks that are likely to happen once a year or never. This is useful in determining the risk to benefit ratio. However, remember that some risks are not worth taking even if they aren’t likely to happen.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Risk Benefit Assessment</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Tyres, hoops, pallets, boxes and crates</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Blankets, sheets, tarps, ropes, and tape</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Buckets, cups, containers, gutters, bottles, and pipes</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Kitchen utensils and digging tools</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Wood pieces, blocks, planks, and sticks</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Seeds, rocks, leaves, and other small items</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Sand</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts: Water</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential physical and emotional benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Potential risks of injury</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 7: Formulating Objectives</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Formulate smart objectives by describing exactly what you want to achieve.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Formulating Objectives tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Someone once said; “If you don’t know where you are going, how will you know that you got there?”</span>

<span dir="ltr">Well-formulated objectives lead to successful, measurable projects. When you have established what the priority issues are that you want to address in your project, you need to formulate an objective for each one of these priorities.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Formulating Objectives tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Formulating Objectives tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">For each objective, answer the prompts to help you identify how exactly to achieve your goals. For multiple objectives you can copy the prompts onto a piece of paper and write down your answers or you can [<span class="underline">download and print out the worksheet</span>](http://aw-formulating-objectives) to fill it in by hand.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Goal:</span>

<span dir="ltr">A goal is the big picture, what you are working towards. For us it is to create or update a natural playground.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Objectives:</span>

<span dir="ltr">Each objective is a step you need to take to reach the goal.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Activities:</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are the different things we do or deliver (produce) to reach each objective.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Formulating Objectives</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Objective:** What aspect of the playground do we want to complete and by when?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Activity:** What do we need to do to reach this objective?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Output:** What is the result or product of this activity?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Responsibility:** Who is responsible for completing this activity and when must they complete it?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Inputs:** What resources (people, things, and money) do we need to complete the activity?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Monitoring:** How can we check that the activity is complete?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Objective:** What aspect of the playground do we want to complete and by when?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Activity:** What do we need to do to reach this objective?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Output:** What is the result or product of this activity?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Responsibility:** Who is responsible for completing this activity and when must they complete it?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Inputs:** What resources (people, things, and money) do we need to complete the activity?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Monitoring:** How can we check that the activity is complete?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 8: Resource Plan</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that everything you have planned can be completed on time and on **budget** by creating a resource plan that is easy to understand.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Resource Plan tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Once you have outlined your **objectives** and activities it is important to determine the **resources** needed to achieve your goal. You can use the Resource Plan tool to draft a budget for your project. Summarising all resources on one sheet prevents you from duplicating items or persons needed.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Resource Plan tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Resource Plan tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">For each objective and activity, identify the resources needed to complete the activity, potential places or people to source the resources from and the overall cost of resources for that activity. Do this by completing the prompts in the tool below. Once you have completed the tool, use the request for donation sample letter as a guide when contacting possible donors.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">For multiple objectives you can copy the prompts onto a piece of paper and write down your answers or you can [<span class="underline">download and print out the worksheet</span>](http://aw-resource-plan) to fill it in by hand.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Use the resource inventory you created in Tool 4 to answer the prompts and add in new resources only if necessary. This helps you make sure you’re using everything you have and keeping costs down.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Resource Plan</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Reference:** Objective and Activity</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Resources:** Describe what item or person is needed.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Possible Sources:** Who could be approached to contribute?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Cost:** How much will these resources cost?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Reference:** Objective and Activity</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Resources:** Describe what item or person is needed.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Possible Sources:** Who could be approached to contribute?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Cost:** How much will these resources cost?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Sample Letter: Request for donation</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Dear parent/ guardian/ community member,</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Request for LOOSE PARTS for our new playground</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">At the Most Fantastic Pre‐School we believe that play is critically important to the development of our children. We would like to empower our children’s creativity! We want our children to a variety of different materials and objects (loose parts) to move, carry, combine, redesign, line‐up, take apart and put back together in multiple ways!</span>

<span dir="ltr">By stocking our new active open play space, located in the centre of our school, with loose parts we want to offer children:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">daily inspiration</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">endless possibilities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">a chance to think</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">encouragement to be creative</span>

<span dir="ltr">Why do we believe this is important? With children’s natural curiosity and creativity, using loose parts will support brain development, scientific experimenting, mathematical thinking, risk-taking, and learning by trial and error ‐ skills we want our children to have to be successful for the rest of their lives!</span>

<span dir="ltr">In order to stock up, we need your help to gather all that we need for our ‘loose parts’. If you have anything at home, or anything you can perhaps gather with your children on an outing, we would very much appreciate it. Please see the list below for items we are looking for.</span>

<span dir="ltr">We appreciate your help and thank you for your support</span>

<span dir="ltr">Kind regards,</span>

<span dir="ltr">MS E.C, Diva</span>

<span dir="ltr">Principal Teacher</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Loose parts:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Plastic pipes or plastic connections (different sizes)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Plastic crates and empty boxes</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Leaves, feathers, shells, pine cones</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Velcro straps</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Washing pegs</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Old sheets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Tarps</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Wooden pallets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Buckets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Old kitchen equipment such as pots, pans, spoons (no knives)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Trays</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Cable drums</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Trees to plant in our garden</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Tyres (car, bicycle or motorbike)</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Wheelbarrows</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Old suitcases</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Baskets</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Old clothes for dressing up</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Logs</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Smooth planks</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Sticks</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">River sand</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Plastic containers</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 9: Monitoring Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that everything you planned gets done by **monitoring** implementation.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Monitoring Summary tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Monitoring is a regular, ongoing activity that provides information you can use to make sure that the implementation of the project is on track. The Monitoring Summary tool helps you summarise your monitoring activities.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Monitoring Summary tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Monitoring Summary tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Just as cars have indicators to show the direction you are going, projects need indicators to show the direction it is going. Once you know where to look you will see that there are many indicators that you can check. Performance indicators monitor that activities are completed during implementation of the natural playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">For each **objective** and activity, identify the indicators needed to measure progress, the way that you will check this indicator, how often you will check it and when it should be completed by. Do this by completing the prompts in the tool below.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">For multiple objectives you can copy the prompts onto a piece of paper and write down your answers or you can [<span class="underline">download and print out the worksheet</span>](http://aw-monitoring-summary) to fill it in by hand.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Indicators were already identified when you formulated objectives in Tool 7.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Monitoring Summary</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Reference:** Objective and Activity</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Indicator:** Indicators that you identified to measure progress.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Means of verification:** How will you check the indicator?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Frequency:** How often will you check?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Date:** When will this be completed?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Reference:** Objective and Activity</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Indicator:** Indicators that you identified to measure progress.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Means of verification:** How will you check the indicator?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Frequency:** How often will you check?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Header: **Date:** When will this be completed?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 10: Monitoring Safety</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that the playground is a safe place by **monitoring** safety standards.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Monitoring Safety tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Nothing stays new forever. Once your new playground is built, it is important to regularly monitor the equipment and spaces against safety standards to make sure that the playground remains a safe and exciting space for children. The Monitoring Safety tool helps you continuously check the safety of your playground over time.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Monitoring Safety tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Monitoring Safety tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Once you have completed the safety checklist in [<span class="underline">Section 1</span>](http://01.html#playground-safety), use the Monitoring Safety tool to check that your playground continues to be safe for children. It is important to do a thorough safety check of the natural playground from time to time to reduce the risk of unnecessary injuries to children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Other ways to avoid unnecessary injuries:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Regularly talk to children about the rules</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make sure to always have active and attentive supervision by adults</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">You can [<span class="underline">download and print out the worksheet</span>](http://aw-safety-checklist) or fill it in below.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Clickable checklist\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Monitoring Safety</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">Fall Height and Fall Zones</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the possible fall height less than 1.5m from all pieces of equipment?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is there a minimum clearance of at least 2m separating each piece of equipment?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Safety Surfacing</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is there impact-absorbing material under all pieces of equipment over 500mm in height? (e.g. sand, bark, mulch or ground rubber)</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the surfacing well maintained? (e.g. at least 300mm depth of loose fill material)</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Design Hazards</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment free of possible spaces a child could get their head stuck such as openings between 80mm and 230mm?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is all moving equipment free of any potential trapping and pinching points?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are there sturdy guard and handrails, appropriate to a child’s hand and grip size? Any platform higher than 30cm is required to have a rail.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Does the larger equipment prevent possible climbing on the outside of the structure? No structures may be higher than 1, 5 metres.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Shading</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is all equipment suitably shaded, if no natural shade applies?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Maintenance</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment’s frame stable and free from movement?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the equipment free from rust, cracks or broken items?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are timber items on the equipment free from rotten or splintered wood?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is all equipment free of protruding fixings and sharp edges?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of loose stones or gravel?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of trip hazards?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the play area free of tree branches or anything sharp at children’s eye level?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Slide</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the slide securely anchored in the ground?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Does the slide have built up sides?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the slide steps have a guard rail?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Swings</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Are the swings securely anchored to the ground?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the swings for children under 6 years of age have chair-like back support?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do the tyre swings have drainage holes to let out rain water?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area under the swings filled with sand?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Sandpit</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the sandpit placed in the shade or have a roof for sun protection?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the depth of the sand pit at least 40cm?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the sandpit filled with river sand?</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Playground</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Is the playground enclosed and gated?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is there enough space in the play area for children to play?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Are all garden tools, equipment and chemicals locked away?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area free of all poisonous or thorny plants?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Is the area free of any litter or dangerous objects lying around, such as glass, tins and rusty nails?</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 11: Monitoring Maintenance</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that your natural playground remains safe by **monitoring** maintenance issues.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Monitoring Maintenance tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Preventive maintenance is an important part of managing your natural playground. Once your new playground is built, it is important to regularly monitor the state of your equipment.</span>

<span dir="ltr">When you have a maintenance program in place, with consistent checks, you will maintain the performance and safety of the equipment on your playground. Regular, little bits of upkeep helps you to avoid major damage in the future.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Monitoring Maintenance tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Monitoring Maintenance tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Use the tool as a guide for monitoring the maintenance needed in your playground. Walk through your playground and take note of the issues listed on the tool. When you find an issue, comment about it in the space provided.</span>

<span dir="ltr">If you prefer you can [<span class="underline">download</span>](http://aw-maintenance-check) and complete a printed version of the tool which can be given to the person that is responsible for maintenance of the playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Monitoring Maintenance</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Broken Equipment:** Check for broken equipment such as loose bolts, missing caps, and cracks. Be sure to check for cracks in the plastic. If you do find a broken piece, remove it (or block it from use) until it is fixed or removed.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Broken glass, trash, and fragments:** Keep your playground clean by disposing of broken glass and other trash, you can prevent cuts and unsanitary conditions.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Loose anchoring:** Check that all play equipment that is higher than 50cm is anchored or firmly fixed to the ground. If you find equipment that is not anchored, remove it (or block it from use) until it is fixed or removed.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Insect Damage:** Insects can damage your equipment if it is made of wood. Keep in mind that if you include natural materials in your play area they will require annual upkeep. You should check for rough spots and regularly sand them down to help prevent splinters.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Animals, rodents, and pests:** Make sure there are no animals, rodents, or pests in hollows and hide‐outs in the playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Problems with surface under play equipment:** Is the surfacing underneath equipment well maintained? For example, does it have at least 300mm depth of loose fill material underneath? Check high‐use areas such as under swings and slides regularly and fill up if necessary. An easy trick is to mark the ideal surfacing depths on the equipment’s “legs”.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **User modifications:** Check if children have tied ropes or other things to parts or equipment or if have they left things out of place.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Rusted or corroded metals:** Metal becomes weak (and dangerous) where it rusts or corrodes. Check carefully where metals come into contact with the ground. It is also important to check in between each piece of swing chain and connection points on the swing frame.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: **Tyres:** Remember tyres are a fire hazard and should be stored safely. Drill holes in tyres to make sure water can not get trapped inside. Make sure the tyres have no metal wires sticking out.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 12: Evaluate Results</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Ensure that the natural playground offers a variety of opportunities by evaluating it against developmental play needs.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">When do you use the Evaluate Results tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">When you evaluate, you want to establish if your playground is offering play opportunities that will impact on the holistic development of children. The evaluate results tool helps you to check that as many as possible of the developmental play needs of children are catered for in your playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Who can use the Evaluate Results tool?</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">How do you use the Evaluate Results tool?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Work through the tool to determine whether your playground offers a variety of play opportunities for children. Mark if the listed opportunity is available in your natural playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Use [<span class="underline">Figure 11</span>](http://01.html#figure-11) to refresh your memory on the different types of play and the play opportunities in [<span class="underline">Section 1</span>](http://01.html#age-appropriate-play) as a guide for the appropriate type of play for different age groups.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Evaluate Results</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">Does your playground offer opportunities for…</span>**

**<span dir="ltr">Physical play:</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Running, walking</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Crawling under and over</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Skipping, hopping and jumping</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Climbing</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Sliding</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Balancing</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Rocking</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Rotating and spinning</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Playing with a ball</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Riding scooters and bikes</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Social and solitary play:</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Quiet places to sit, talk, or think</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Places to hide</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Interaction with other children</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Playing on your own</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Creative play:</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Sand and mud</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Water</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Natural loose parts</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Recycled loose parts</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Chalk, drawing or painting</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Music or sound making items</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Pretend play items and places</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Performing areas</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">Does the playground?</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Encourage play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stimulate the senses</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stimulate curiosity</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Stimulate imaginative play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Support maths and science play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Support opportunities for communication</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Encourage a love of nature</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Clickable checklist\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

# <span dir="ltr">Facilitator’s Guide</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Notes for Facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr">These notes were developed to guide facilitators of the Natural Playground Toolkit. To meet the needs of each individual group, facilitators will need to adapt as required.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Target Group Workshop</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">This workshop will be useful to:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Volunteers on management committees. Organisations are assumed to have specialists in **ECD** who are able to train using the toolkit.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Managers and staff (at least ECD NQF level 4 or 5) of schools.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Provincial and district officials, social service professionals that are employed by Schools, ECD’s, NPO’s, DSD, sports & recreation departments and municipality officials.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Purpose of the Workshop</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">People who attended this workshop and received the materials are able to:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Describe the importance of play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Discuss strategies to engage communities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Implement a playground **needs assessment**</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Develop a playground **action plan**</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Track the progress and success of the project</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Duration</span>

<span dir="ltr">The duration of this workshop is a minimum of twelve hours. It can be presented over two days or session by session on different days if it is more convenient for the group.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Selection of Facilitators</span>

<span dir="ltr">The ideal facilitator for this program will have:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">At least five years of experience in the early childhood development field</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">A demonstrated ability to work effectively with people whose cultures are different from their own, including differences in race, religion, ethnicity, national origin, gender, socio‐economic status, level of education, age etc.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Prior experience as a facilitator and knowledge of outcome‐based training</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">A command of the language of instruction and terminology related to early childhood development</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Selection of Training Venue</span>

<span dir="ltr">The ideal training venue has:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Adequate free parking and easy access to public transport</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Enough light but also the possibility to make the room dark enough to see powerpoint slides, if the facilitator decides to create and use these in their presentation</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Air conditioning, fans, heaters or other ways to make the room temperature comfortable</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">A place to prepare and serve tea and refreshments</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Limited disturbances</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Good acoustics so that your voice will carry</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Enough space to comfortably accommodate your group and their movement, including small group discussions</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Toilet facilities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Accessibility for people with disabilities</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Remember</span>

<span dir="ltr">You have to familiarize yourself with the venue beforehand so that you can:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check for enough electrical outlets for a laptop and data projector if you choose to use these</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that you can set up the room as you require</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Plan for your position with a table etc</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Check that there is either a screen or a smooth wall to project against if you plan to use a data projector and check to see that it works so you can make alternate arrangements before the audience arrives if necessary</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Toolkit Package</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Facilitators Guide (this section of the toolkit) that guides the facilitator in implementing the workshop</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Participants toolkit with Information for participants to use during training, this can either be access to the toolkit on an electronic device, or printed copies of relevant sections, or both</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tips for handling the workshop</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Prepare yourself with the necessary material to conduct a workshop.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 6: Workshop facilitation tips\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">The most important tool is you</span>

<span dir="ltr">See that you are neatly dressed and groomed. Use movement wisely and engage your audience with gestures and facial expressions.</span>

<span dir="ltr"> </span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Set up of workshop space</span>

<span dir="ltr">The ideal room setup permits easy viewing of the facilitator and slide projections. The facilitator should be able to move about and engage the audience. It should also facilitate ease of group discussions. Figure 14 gives examples of possible workshop arrangements.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-workshop-arrangement</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 14</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: Arrangement of workshop space.</span>

<span dir="ltr"> </span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Refreshments</span>

<span dir="ltr">Scheduling enough body and refreshment breaks is vital. Serving refreshments is key as it impacts on the atmosphere and mood of the workshop. Arrange for someone to help you have tea and refreshments ready.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Tips for adult training</span>

<span dir="ltr">Knowledge of a few basic principles that underlie the learning process can guide facilitators in presenting in a way that optimizes participants learning.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Adults learn because they want to. They know what they need to learn. Adults learn better by doing. This is why we need to actively engage the participants in the learning process. Participant’s involvement has many benefits. It can help to improve retention and generate interest.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Video 7: Adult training tips\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Training Methods</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Facilitator’s role</span>

<span dir="ltr">Your role is to serve as the facilitator of the group’s learning. A good facilitator should:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Be a neutral servant of the group</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Focus the group on the given task and overall agenda</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Suggest methods and procedures for achieving the task</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Protect group members from personal attack</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Remain non‐defensive and accept feedback with goodwill</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Help the group to reach win‐win decisions or consensus</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Facilitation methods</span>

<span dir="ltr">There are several facilitation methods utilised in this workshop such as a mini lecture which is similar to a lecture, but shorter and actively involves some level of group participation.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Multi‐sensory approaches</span>

<span dir="ltr">People process information through different perceptual styles, including auditory and visual. Using a variety of activities to create multi‐sensory experiences can accommodate different learning styles and can help to reinforce skills or knowledge acquired through other senses. Beside your material, enrich the learning experience by offering opportunities for individuals to share relevant knowledge and experiences. Involvement techniques are a must.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Engage the audience with methods like seeking their agreement to a statement, asking for examples or applying your own experience.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Group discussion</span>

<span dir="ltr">Group discussions can take a variety of formats. One form is the structured discussion which involves guided interactions among participants. The facilitator sets the direction and tone of the discussion and keeps the group on track.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Brainstorming</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">The facilitator will pose a question or problem to the group and will ask participants to generate as many ideas or responses as possible. The facilitator records each response and at the end discusses the ideas with the group. Brainstorming is an effective method of both generating participant involvement and drawing on the **resources** of the group to enrich the learning experience.</span>

<span dir="ltr">PowerPoint pointers:</span>

<span dir="ltr">If you choose to create powerpoint slides for your workshop, make sure to practice the slides so you know them. Do not turn your back to the audience and read from the screen. It makes you look unprepared. Rather position the screen of your laptop so you can read from it but make consistent eye contact during the presentation.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Using Advocacy</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Advocacy is when someone speaks on behalf of or in support of a vulnerable group and their rights and needs with the aim of gaining support or commitment.</span>

<span dir="ltr">When we advocate for natural playgrounds, we want to ensure that</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">the voice of children is heard on playgrounds and its importance for healthy development</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">the right of children to play is achieved at a nominal cost</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">the play needs of children are considered when developing playgrounds</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">those with influence in government departments create a supportive environment for the implementation of Natural playgrounds at school level</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Advocacy for the Handbook</span>

<span dir="ltr">The goal for using advocacy in the Natural Playgrounds Toolkit is to gain support and commitment from decision makers for the implementation of natural playgrounds.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">In the</span> <span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">Section 1</span>](http://01.html) of the toolkit, you will find information to use when advocating. Depending on the audience, venue and the amount of time available, you will plan your talk to cover the following issues:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">The importance of play in child development</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Natural playgrounds as a solution to providing play opportunities to children at a nominal cost</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Qualities of for advocates</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Effective advocates can influence policy and **budgets** by using facts and strong relationships to educate government officials and the public on the changes they want to bring to play opportunities for young children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Effective advocates have</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Good communication skills** to argue their side</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Analytical skills** to analyse the situation and argument</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Good people skills** to make and build connections</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Perseverance** to keep on trying until they succeed</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Creativity** to find different ways and angles to present their side</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Passion** and a firm belief in the cause they are advocating for</span>

## <span dir="ltr">Using participatory workshops</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Most of the tools in this toolkit are specifically designed to be used by groups of diverse **partners** and stakeholders.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition participatory workshops\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">There are two **workshops** that cover the tools. At the end of each workshop a task team is elected that summarises the information gathered in the workshop.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Exploration Workshop Guide</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Pinpoint **stakeholders** and where to begin in the creation of your natural playground by facilitating the participation of community members.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">When should you run an Exploration Workshop?</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definition\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Finding a starting point for your playground **needs assessment** can be daunting. There are so many possible things that could be investigated. This community participation workshop uses the community as experts of their environment to pinpoint issues that can be explored. Certain issues will be explored on the day, others will be identified and then explored by a task team after the workshop.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Before the workshop</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Identify facilitators**: You will need an experienced person to facilitate the community participation workshop. In addition you will need a co‐facilitator to take notes of the group discussions and feedback. The facilitators need to prepare by:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Reading through all sections of the Natural Playgrounds Toolkit and ensuring they understand the process of creating a natural playground from start to finish.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Reading through the necessary tools in the Toolbox and these instructions for this workshop in the facilitator’s guide.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">**Identify participants**: Use Tool 1: Partner Finder as a guide to identify as many people as possible to attend the workshop. There should be at least 1 or 2 people per category.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Identify venue**: Find a venue that is in the community and close to the existing playground you want to update or the site for the new playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Arrange the workshop**: Make necessary arrangements for the workshop such as refreshments, meals, stationery, devices pre-loaded with the Natural Playground Toolkit, arrange for a facilitator and two or three note takers. Remember to check for any dietary requirements of participants and cater to the special needs of people with disabilities.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Exploration Workshop Schedule</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Welcome and Logistics</span>

> <span dir="ltr">10 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">9:00 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Introduce yourself, explain the programme and point out the amenities to participants. State the goal for the workshop and the group rules.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Ice Breaker</span>

> <span dir="ltr">15 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">9:10 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Begin your workshop with an ice breaker. This allows participants to introduce themselves and feel more comfortable.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Stand in a circle, holding a ball. As an example, state your name and a game that you enjoyed playing as a child. Throw the ball to someone else in the circle. When they catch it, they have to say their name and a game that they enjoyed playing as a child or something similar such as their favourite place they used to play. They then throw the ball to someone else who shares a similar thing about themselves. Follow the pattern until everyone has a chance to introduce themselves.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Set the Scene</span>

> <span dir="ltr">45 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">9:25 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Give each participant a copy of the Natural Playgrounds Toolkit to use as a guide during the workshop.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Set the scene for the day by doing a thirty minute presentation on the concepts in the booklet and why the workshop is being held.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Define “where we want to be”</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">10:10 a.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 3: Playground Dreams to explore what you want to include in your playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group follows the instructions on the tool.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Note takers should compile a combined list of ideas from the group feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Define the “who”</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">10:40 a.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 1: Partner Finder to define who has an interest or investment in your playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make sure participants understand the concept of [<span class="underline">brainstorming</span>](http://02.html#brainstorm).</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group follows the instructions on the tool.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Note takers should compile a combined list of ideas from the group feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Tea Break</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">11:10 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Break for tea to allow participants to rest and relax with refreshments. As a facilitator, you can network and answer individual questions or comments if necessary.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Define “where we are”</span>

> <span dir="ltr">60 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">11:40 a.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 2: Playground Map to explore how people experience the playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group follows the instructions on the tool.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Note takers should compile a combined list of ideas from the group feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Lunch</span>

> <span dir="ltr">45 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">12:40 p.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Break for lunch to allow participants to rest and relax with food. As a facilitator, you can network and answer individual questions or comments if necessary.</span>

<span dir="ltr"> </span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Define “what we have”</span>

> <span dir="ltr">60 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">1:25 p.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 4: Resource Inventory to explore what resources are available.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group follows the instructions on the tool.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Let each small group complete the tool by brainstorming.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Note takers should compile a combined list of ideas from the group feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Define “where we are”</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">2:25 p.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 5: Issue Finder to explore the legal and practical issues of creating a natural playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group follows the instructions on the tool.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Note takers should compile a combined list of ideas from the group feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Define “where we want to be”</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">2:55 p.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 6: Risk Benefit Assessment to explore the risks and benefits of loose part play.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group follows the instructions on the tool.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Note takers should compile a combined list of ideas from the group feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Tea Break</span>

> <span dir="ltr">20 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">3:25 p.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Break for tea to allow participants to rest and relax with refreshments. As a facilitator, you can network and answer individual questions or comments if necessary.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Elect a task team</span>

> <span dir="ltr">45 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">3:45 p.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Ask participants to nominate five to ten people to process the information that was gathered during the day. Confirm that the nominees are willing to serve on the task team. If not, ask for another nominee. Make sure to include people who work in the field of early childhood development on the task team.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">These activities can be done in one day or over several sessions depending on how much time people have available. The allocated time and starting times indicated can be adjusted to suit each workshop as needed.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Visioning Workshop Guide</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Develop a shared vision and goals for a natural playground by facilitating the participation of community members.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

#### <span dir="ltr">When should you run a Visioning Workshop?</span>

<span dir="ltr">Once you have had an Exploration Workshop where you have identified stakeholders, problem areas, and services in the community, the next step is to hold a Visioning Workshop for your natural playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr"> </span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Before the workshop</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Identify facilitators**: You will need an experienced person to facilitate the community participation workshop. In addition you will need a co‐facilitator to take notes of the group discussions and feedback. It is best if the same facilitator and co-facilitator who ran the Exploration Workshop also run the Visioning Workshop. The facilitators need to prepare by:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Reading through all sections of the Natural Playgrounds Toolkit and ensuring they understand the process of creating a natural playground from start to finish.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Reading through the necessary tools in the Toolbox and these instructions for this workshop in the facilitator’s guide.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">**Identify participants**: Invite all participants that attended the Exploration Workshop and invite all partners and stakeholders that were identified in Tool 1: Partner Finder in the Exploration Workshop.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Identify venue**: Find a venue that is in the community and close to the existing playground you want to update or the site for the new playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Arrange the workshop**: Make necessary arrangements for the workshop such as refreshments, meals, stationery, devices pre-loaded with the Natural Playground Toolkit, arrange for a facilitator and two or three note takers. Remember to check for any dietary requirements of participants and cater to the special needs of people with disabilities.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Visioning Workshop Schedule</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Welcome and Recap</span>

> <span dir="ltr">10 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">8:30 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Introduce yourself and welcome participants. Summarise where we are in the process of building a natural playground and where we want to get to by the end of the day. Ask for comments on the previous workshop session.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Develop a common vision</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">8:40 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people. Each group is to either draw, write, make a poem, do a rap song or commercial or use any other creative means to share their vision for their playground to the group as a whole in sixty seconds.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Each group has ten minutes to prepare, ten minutes to practice and then there is two minutes per group to present feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">Your vision communicates what you believe the right playground will do for your children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Vision statements should be inspiring and uplifting to everyone involved in the project and easy to communicate. The statement should be short enough to fit on a t-shirt.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Here are a few vision statement examples:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Inspiring kids to play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make time for play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Playground of dreams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">When kids play, we all win</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Play - the work of children</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Results of Exploration Workshop</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">9:10 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into five groups:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Group 1 get the summary of Tool 2: Playground Map</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Group 2 get the summary of Tool 3: Playground Dreams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Group 3 get the summary of Tool 4: Resource Inventory</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Group 4 get the summary of Tool 5: Issue Finder</span>

> <span dir="ltr">Each group is to discuss the summary for fifteen minutes and then there is two minutes per group to present feedback.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Finding priorities</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">9:40 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Before the workshop, write out the summary of Tool 3: Playground Dreams on twelve separate pieces of large paper. Each of the categories, for example Gross Motor Play, is to be written on its own paper with the corresponding suggestions from the Exploration Workshop written underneath.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Participants have to vote for one item in each category by writing their initials next to it. Facilitator is to count the votes, determine a winner in each category, and mark it clearly. If there is a draw, simply revote that one category. Make sure to assure participants that the other ideas are not thrown out, they are simply reserved for a next time.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Tea Break</span>

> <span dir="ltr">30 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">10:10 a.m.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">Break for tea to allow participants to rest and relax with refreshments. As a facilitator, you can network and answer individual questions or comments if necessary.</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Develop the goals</span>

> <span dir="ltr">60 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">10:40 a.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 7: Formulating Objectives to formulate smart objectives by describing exactly what you want to achieve.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into twelve groups. Each group gets one of the twelve priorities to work with (or more than one if there are less than twelve groups).</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make sure participants understand what they need to do by going through the tool with them, using examples.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Let each group complete the tool by brainstorming. Remind them that they have to keep the information we discussed earlier (Results of Exploration Workshop) in mind when writing up objectives. They have fifteen minutes to do this.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Resource Plan</span>

> <span dir="ltr">40 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">11:40 a.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 8: Resource Plan to see that everything you have planned can be completed on time and on budget.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into twelve groups. Each group gets one of the twelve priorities to work with (or more than one if there are less than twelve groups).</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make sure participants understand what they need to do by going through the tool with them, using examples.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Let each group complete the tool by brainstorming. Remind them that they have to keep the information we discussed earlier (Results of Exploration Workshop) in mind when writing up objectives.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

1.  <span dir="ltr">Monitoring and Evaluation</span>

> <span dir="ltr">40 minutes</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">12:20 p.m.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Give a short overview of the concepts in Section 5.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Use Tool 9: Monitoring Summary to see that everything you planned gets done.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Divide participants into small groups of approximately five people.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Make sure participants understand what they need to do by going through the tool with them, using examples.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Let each group complete the tool by brainstorming. Remind them that they have to keep the information we discussed earlier (Results of Exploration Workshop) in mind when writing up objectives.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Each small group provides feedback to the bigger group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Discuss tools 10, 11 and 12 with the group and explain when to use them.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Tip box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr">These activities can be done in one day or over several sessions depending on how much time people have available. The allocated time and starting times indicated can be adjusted to suit each workshop as needed.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

> <span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Use the following draft documents to tell people about your natural playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Sample Meeting Invitation</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">WE NEED YOUR HELP!</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Saturday, 18 October, 9h00‐11h00</span>

<span dir="ltr">at The Most Fantastic ECD Centre</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Dear \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_</span>

<span dir="ltr">The <span class="underline">Most Fantastic Pre‐School</span> is planning an exciting new natural playground. Please join us for an informational meeting to find out how a natural playground can benefit our children. Learn more and come and help us think.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Many of you will still remember playing outside until your parents called you. Today’s children are experiencing a different kind of childhood. Television and mobile phones mean that many children spend as little as thirty minutes in free, outdoor play each day. Research shows that playing outside can improve vision, reduce ADHD symptoms, improve school performance, reduce anxiety, and encourage a love for exercise.</span>

<span dir="ltr">A natural playground provides simple structures and natural materials that inspire imagination! Rocks, sand, hollow logs and water encourage climbing, construction, experimentation and problem‐solving.</span>

<span dir="ltr">The <span class="underline">Most Fantastic Pre‐School</span> values your input on this project, and your support will help us to put a plan into action. The meeting will be hosted by <span class="underline">Ms. E.C Diva</span> at <span class="underline">The Most Fantastic Pre‐School</span>.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Please let us know if you can make it at <span class="underline">555 555 5555</span>.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Yours in playing,</span>

<span dir="ltr"><span class="underline">Ms E.C. Diva</span></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Sample introduction letter to parents</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Dear Parents</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">We send this letter in case you have missed our last meeting where we discussed the new way of play we are embracing at our school.</span>

<span dir="ltr">We are excited to announce that we are introducing loose parts play in the <span class="underline">Most Fantastic Pre‐School</span>.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Staff will be encouraging children to use their imagination by playing with resources including cardboard boxes, tyres, baskets, old sheets, wooden planks and plastic gutters. These are called ‘loose parts’. They can be used in many different ways, allowing children to make anything from a pirate ship or castle to a road or house.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts play will happen in and out of class time; it will be a chance for children to play freely with friends, investigate, discover, explore, create, use lots of trial and error to learn</span>

<span dir="ltr">for themselves and learn to make their own judgments about adventurous play and recognising safety limits.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Please ensure your children are dressed for the weather so they can join in properly – they might need a raincoat or sunscreen, sun hats, or a spare set of clothes depending on the weather.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Staff and children will be working together to start the loose parts play.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Staff will receive additional information on loose parts play.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Issues including how to use the resources safely have been investigated.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Children will be involved in discussing health and safety issues.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">All items will be checked initially and on a regular basis for safety.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Parents and carers, would you like to come and see what’s happening? Do you want to understand why we are moving to this type of play? Phone me on <span class="underline">555 555 5555</span> so we can arrange a time to meet.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Do you have any resources to donate? We will need loose parts to keep things interesting. Currently we are looking for:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Let us know if you’d like someone to collect donated items.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Yours in playing,</span>

<span dir="ltr"><span class="underline">Ms E.C. Diva</span></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Box\]</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Sample play policy</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"><span class="underline">The Most Fantastic Pre-School</span></span>

<span dir="ltr">recognises:</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

-   <span dir="ltr">that children have the right to play</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">that play is the work of a child</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">the importance of having enough time and good places to play freely</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Playing is one of the most important aspects of a child’s life.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Playing helps children be healthy, well and happy.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Playing is the way that children learn best and it makes them positive about learning later in life.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Most importantly, playing improves children’s ability to develop and grow.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">We value the children’s urge and desire to play and therefore aim to provide for a broad range of play opportunities within the school playgrounds before, during and after the school day.</span>

<span dir="ltr"><span class="underline">The Most Fantastic Pre-School</span> recognises:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">that children will naturally create and/or seek out challenging situations</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">when playing, some children may have accidents, get dirty, wet or upset</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">we recognise that any potential risk of harm to children needs to be balanced with the benefits that free play offers</span>

<span dir="ltr">We will do our best to avoid that children get hurt by providing supervision for the play opportunities that we provide.</span>

<span dir="ltr"><span class="underline">The Most Fantastic Pre-School</span> believes that adults’ attitudes towards, and understanding of, children’s play will have a huge effect on the quality of the play opportunities we offer at school and at home. We will therefore seek out training opportunities and support research among our staff so that they are confident to facilitate children’s freely chosen, self‐directed play. We will do our best to advocate for play with parents when we have meetings.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Box\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Using Coaching</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Coaching is done to improve performance and to develop specific skills, in our case this is the development of a natural playground. Coaching usually takes place on a face‐to‐face, one‐to‐one basis and has a very specific planned programme with a short timeframe. For a coaching relationship to work, it must be based on a foundation of mutual respect and willingness to participate.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Coaching is an effective development approach because it:</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">develops competencies, skills and abilities</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">provides corrective feedback to the participant</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">empowers participants to learn and grow</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">helps participants get clarity in their thinking</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">identifies and solves problems</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">makes decisions, implements changes and overcomes obstacles</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">provides flexibility in the learning process</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">helps participants to implement new knowledge and skills into their practice</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Coaching for the Natural Playground workshops</span>

<span dir="ltr">The goals of using coaching sessions as part of the Natural Playground process is to work with the participant to solve implementation problems and to improve the quality of natural playgrounds that are developed at schools and in the community. The ideal situation is that each participant is paired with a coach to reach these goals.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Skills and qualities for coaches</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Include definitions\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Coaches should be:</span>

-   **<span dir="ltr">Good communicators</span>**

    -   <span dir="ltr">**Strong verbal communication skills** ‐ excellent ability to listen, good presentation skills, ability to summarise information, experience of giving feedback. Coaches can recognise changes in mood and body language and adapt as needed.</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">**Good written communication skills** ‐ ability to write **action plans**, SMART goals and summarise discussions.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Knowledgeable on the relevant coaching topics** (for example, Early Childhood Development, Children’s developmental needs, play, natural playgrounds, **loose parts**, **free play**, design process, grade R curriculum ‐ all the topics and tools covered in the Natural Playground Toolkit).</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Experienced in training or coaching sessions** (for example, generating new ideas, encouraging participation, managing disagreements, facilitating a process, guiding participants).</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Strong in soft skills** – coaches should be emotionally intelligent, be good with people and able to establish trust and rapport with people. Coaches can build warm, confidence‐inspiring relationships.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Non‐judgmental, respectful, and accepting of other people** – coaches should remain objective and impartial and be understanding and compassionate of the participant and maintain confidentiality.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Coach‐mode** – a coach does not treat participants like children, wanting to solve their problems for them, rather a coach sees the participant as able, responsible, resourceful and capable to choose.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Up to date** ‐ a coach is willing to commit time and energy to learn coaching skills.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Coaches assist participants in developing to their full potential. They help participants grow and develop a skill by analysing their performances, instructing in relevant skills and by providing encouragement.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

| **<span dir="ltr">Coaching Do’s</span>**                          | **<span dir="ltr">Coaching Don’ts</span>**                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span dir="ltr">Serve as a facilitator</span>                     | <span dir="ltr">Tell participants what to do</span>                |
| <span dir="ltr">Serve as a non-judgemental outsider</span>        | <span dir="ltr">Grade participants’ ideas, plans or actions</span> |
| <span dir="ltr">Use a defined model</span>                        | <span dir="ltr">Dictate all the details</span>                     |
| <span dir="ltr">Ask questions</span>                              | <span dir="ltr">Provide answers or solve problems</span>           |
| <span dir="ltr">Listen</span>                                     | <span dir="ltr">Be the expert</span>                               |
| <span dir="ltr">Ask for details</span>                            | <span dir="ltr">Dwell on mistakes</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr">Serve as a sounding board</span>                  | <span dir="ltr">Act as a therapist</span>                          |
| <span dir="ltr">Challenge perceptions</span>                      | <span dir="ltr">Argue that participants are wrong</span>           |
| <span dir="ltr">Focus on the future</span>                        | <span dir="ltr">Dwell on the past</span>                           |
| <span dir="ltr">Call for action</span>                            | <span dir="ltr">Insist or demand</span>                            |
| <span dir="ltr">Challenge participants to meet their goals</span> | <span dir="ltr">Be afraid to give feedback to participants</span>  |

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Coaching model for the natural playground process</span>

<span dir="ltr">There are many different coaching models in circulation. The one that will work well in the natural playground process is the GROW model that stands for **G**oal, **R**eality, Options, **W**ay forward. It provides a structure for coaching discussions. The model places the responsibility for development on the participant. They must come to the coaching session with goals for discussion.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">AW-grow-process</span>

<span dir="ltr">Reference: Figure 15</span>

<span dir="ltr">Caption: The **GROW** model.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">The **GROW** model is used as a discussion tool with four stages for *each* coaching session.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<table><thead><tr class="header"><th><span dir="ltr">Stage 1 <strong>G</strong>oal:</span></th><th><span dir="ltr">The <strong>participant</strong> brings the issue they want to work on and solve to the session and writes it down. The <strong>coach</strong> uses questioning and listening skills to help the participant to define exactly what they want to achieve.</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Stage 2 <strong>R</strong>eality:</span></td><td><span dir="ltr">The <strong>coach</strong> uses questioning and listening skills to help the participant define the issues that need to be addressed. The <strong>participant</strong> talks about the reality they are facing; issues, obstacles and writes it down.</span></td></tr><tr class="even"><td><span dir="ltr">Stage 3 <strong>O</strong>ptions:</span></td><td><p><span dir="ltr">The <strong>coach</strong> uses questioning and listening skills to help the participant to identify obstacles and options. The <strong>participant</strong> brainstorms obstacles and options and writes it down.</span></p><p><span dir="ltr"></span></p></td></tr><tr class="odd"><td><span dir="ltr">Stage 4 <strong>W</strong>ay forward:</span></td><td><span dir="ltr">The <strong>coach</strong> helps the participant to develop an action plan to establish what specific actions the participant will take. Gives feedback on the participants progress. The <strong>participant</strong> writes down an action plan and makes sure to implement it before the next coaching session.</span></td></tr></tbody></table>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Using Group Study</span>

<span dir="ltr">Group study is when a small group of people meet regularly to discuss toolkit material. Each group is unique and benefits from the backgrounds and abilities of all of its members. Forming study groups is a strategy to supplement learning. Groups can share unique insights and learn from each other. For group study to be effective, a leader that is more experienced or has a higher level of education is a prerequisite.</span>

#### <span dir="ltr">Benefits of group study</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Improve your notes** Comparing notes allows participants to fill in any information or important concepts they may have missed.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Sharing talents** Groups provide participants an opportunity to benefit from the talents and knowledge of the other group members.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**Support system** Group is a great way to give and receive motivation and support from fellow students.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">**It makes learning fun** Studying in a group environment breaks the monotony of spending long hours studying on your own.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Group study in the Natural Playground process</span>

<span dir="ltr">The goals of using group study in the Natural Playground process is to create an environment where</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">participants can motivate and encourage each other to progress and avoid procrastination</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">participants can bring and discuss questions about the toolkit material</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">participants can ask and discuss practical questions about the implementation of the learning</span>

<span dir="ltr">Group study sessions should include foundation phase teachers with Grade R teachers. The group study can follow the structure of the guided self‐study toolkit outline. Give members time (one week) to work through a section on their own and then discuss that section at the group study session.</span>

### <span dir="ltr">Skills and qualities for group study leaders</span>

<span dir="ltr">The Group study leader should</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Have a higher qualification or more experience than the rest of the group.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Be able to keep the group focused on the agenda and goals for the day.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Keep the group study session from becoming a social group. Groups can always socialise at other times.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Require that each group member does their share by preparing for the session.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Ensure that no one dominate the group. It is important that all members have an equal opportunity to participate.</span>

<span dir="ltr"> </span>

### <span dir="ltr">Forming a group study</span>

<span dir="ltr">Study groups are effective only if they are taken seriously and conducted regularly with a key focus every time.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**How many**: Three to six participants</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Who**: Participants with the same goals such asworking through, understanding and implementing the Natural Playground Toolkit</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Duration**: One to two‐hour sessions</span>

<span dir="ltr">**When**: Try to have the group study in the same place and on the same day at the same time every week. This will help people to remember when to attend</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Where**: Make sure you do it in a location with none or very little distractions and where group members can communicate freely.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Managing a successful Study Group</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Decide on basic ground rules to keep order and structure** – make rules about participation, cell phone use, respect for each other, keeping to the agenda and so on.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Create clear goals and objectives for every study session** ‐ knowing what you want to achieve in a study session will help keep the group on target and prevent losing track of time.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Be prepared** ‐ unprepared participants are a frustration to themselves and every other member that did prepare. Each member should review the material and make notes on insights they had and questions they want to discuss</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Ensure participation** – in this way everyone has an equal opportunity to benefit from the group. A good way is to assign topics to each person to lead the discussion on.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Be willing to ask for help** – no one knows everything, and that is okay. If there is a disagreement in the group on a topic, commit to get the answers from a senior staff member and get back to the group.</span>

<span dir="ltr">**Stay focused** ‐ before each session, someone should be assigned to lead the session. The leader must ensure the group sets goals, is productive, stays on track and achieves all the goals. Remember to take a break during the study session.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Using Guided Self-study</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Guided self-study handbooks allow independent learning in a structured format delivered entirely online or electronically. Participants are given all the materials needed to complete the process without supervision or attending classes. Guided self‐study fosters a self‐reliant learning experience where participants work through the content provided in the toolkit completely autonomously.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Benefits of Guided self‐study</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">You face fewer distractions when you are on your own; this helps you to get focused and stay focused.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Control your study environment. When you study on your own, you can choose the environment that is perfect for you; maybe you like soft background music, a desk and bright lights.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Control your study schedule. Some people prefer to work at night, others early in the morning. Some need a break every 30 minutes, others can work for two to three hours at a time. Some want to study every day, others want to study twice a week.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Control your study agenda. Studying on your own gives you the freedom to spend more time on a specific topic, even doing more research on it, if you are interested in it or want to understand it better.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Guided self‐study in the Natural Playground process</span>

<span dir="ltr">The goals of using Guided Self‐Study in the Natural Playground workshops is to</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Encourage participants to explore topics</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Assist participants to develop study skills</span>

<span dir="ltr">Participants are required to keep a Study Journal. After each topic, there are self‐reflective questions that need to be answered before they can progress. The answers, in addition to any other notes participants wish to make, are written in the study journal.</span>

<span dir="ltr">In addition, coaching and group study sessions are available to discuss and clarify the topics further.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

### <span dir="ltr">Managing to be successful at guided self‐study</span>

<span dir="ltr">Before you start studying, clarify the following for yourself</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Are you ready to learn?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Do you believe you can do it? If not, consider what you need to do to believe in yourself. What is your mindset? Are you positive? Do you believe you can grow?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Are you organised? Do you have a place and time to learn? Did you inform family members? Do you have access to the internet and a device to go online? Do you have a notebook (study journal) and pens? Did you switch off everything that can distract you?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Are you self‐disciplined? Can you stick to your decisions or do you need to ask someone to hold you accountable?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Can you be honest with yourself? Self reflection and self‐evaluation is part of learning. If you want to improve, research information on how to improve your self‐reflection skills. If you do not stop and pause to consider what you have learned, you do not give your brain a chance to evaluate and integrate the information.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Do you have learning goals?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Set timeline goals for each module and the entire process and clearly indicated when you want to complete it. If you are part of a group‐study or have a coach, this may influence your timing.</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Set your own goals for what you want to achieve by completing the playground.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">How do I learn best?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Can you sit quietly and read the material? Do you need to take notes or draw pictures to understand the material? Do you need to find someone to tell them what you learned so that you can remember it? Do you need to go and do what you learned to remember it? You can read up on learning styles if you are unsure how you learn best. When you know your preference, find ways to make it work for you.</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">How do I know that I am learning?</span>

    -   <span dir="ltr">Reflection - after each topic answer these three reflective questions honestly:</span>

> <span dir="ltr">1. What information surprised you?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">2. What do you know now that you didn’t know before?</span>
>
> <span dir="ltr">3. What will you do better or differently from now on?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">References</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Penreach Research Documents</span>

<span dir="ltr">Penreach ECD Handbook</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.playscotland.org/wp‐content/uploads/assets/Documents/CYWUResearchComplete.pdf</span>](http://www.playscotland.org/wp%E2%80%90content/uploads/assets/Documents/CYWUResearchComplete.pdf)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.firstthingsfirst.org/early‐childhood‐matters/investing‐in‐early‐childhood/</span>](http://www.firstthingsfirst.org/early%E2%80%90childhood%E2%80%90matters/investing%E2%80%90in%E2%80%90early%E2%80%90childhood/)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/inbrief‐science‐of‐ecd/</span>](http://www.developingchild.harvard.edu/resources/inbrief%E2%80%90science%E2%80%90of%E2%80%90ecd/)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.gooeybrains.com</span>](http://www.gooeybrains.com)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.childrenandnature.org</span>](http://www.childrenandnature.org)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.childrenssafetynetwork.org</span>](http://www.childrenssafetynetwork.org)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.playgroundideas.org</span>](http://www.playgroundideas.org)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.inspiringscotland.org.uk/wp‐content/uploads/2017/03/Loose‐Parts‐Play‐web.pdf</span>](http://www.inspiringscotland.org.uk/wp%E2%80%90content/uploads/2017/03/Loose%E2%80%90Parts%E2%80%90Play%E2%80%90web.pdf)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.kidsafensw.org/imagesDB/wysiwyg/NaturalPlayspaces2015\_2.pdf</span>](http://www.kidsafensw.org/imagesDB/wysiwyg/NaturalPlayspaces2015_2.pdf)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.playwales.org.uk/eng/schoolstoolkit%20</span>](http://www.playwales.org.uk/eng/schoolstoolkit%20)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">www.playgroundideas.org</span>](http://www.playgroundideas.org)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">http://www.playengland.org.uk/media/70684/design‐for‐play.pdf</span>](http://www.playengland.org.uk/media/70684/design%E2%80%90for%E2%80%90play.pdf)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">http://valerianllc.com/wp/wp‐content/uploads/2017/11/Nature‐Play‐Design‐Guidelines.pdf</span>](http://valerianllc.com/wp/wp%E2%80%90content/uploads/2017/11/Nature%E2%80%90Play%E2%80%90Design%E2%80%90Guidelines.pdf)</span>

<span dir="ltr">[<span class="underline">https://children.pan.org.za/sites/default/files/publicationdocuments/Play%20Policy%20Brief%20‐%20ACTPSA%20‐%20launched%2031%20May%202017.pdf</span>](https://children.pan.org.za/sites/default/files/publicationdocuments/Play%20Policy%20Brief%20%E2%80%90%20ACTPSA%20%E2%80%90%20launched%2031%20May%202017.pdf)</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

## <span dir="ltr">Glossary</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Action plan</span>

<span dir="ltr">A document that lists the steps that have to be taken in order to reach your goals or objectives.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Budget</span>

<span dir="ltr">A budget is a financial plan that shows what money you expect to have and what money you expect to spend to achieve your plans.</span>

<span dir="ltr">ECD</span>

<span dir="ltr">ECD stands for Early Childhood Development.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Evaluation</span>

<span dir="ltr">The systematic process of collecting, analysing and using information to determine the impact of a project; is it making a difference?</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Free play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Unstructured, voluntary, child‐initiated activity that allows children to develop their imaginations while exploring and experiencing the world around them. It is driven by children's natural curiosity, love of discovery, and enthusiasm.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts</span>

<span dir="ltr">Loose parts are materials with no specific set of directions that can be used alone or combined with other materials. They can be moved, carried, combined, redesigned, lined up, taken apart and put back together in multiple ways.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Monitoring</span>

<span dir="ltr">The systematic process of collecting, analysing and using information to track a programme's progress toward reaching its objectives.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Natural Playground</span>

<span dir="ltr">An area where kids can play with *natural* elements such as sand, water, wood and living plants.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Needs Assessment</span>

<span dir="ltr">A systematic process for determining and addressing needs, or gaps between current conditions (where we are now) and desired conditions or "wants" (where we want to be).</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Objective</span>

<span dir="ltr">A description of the thing that you plan to do or achieve.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Participatory Workshop</span>

<span dir="ltr">A participatory or interactive workshop involves that participants work together towards a particular objective. It uses tools that stimulate creativity through working together and applying participants experiences and expertise.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Resources</span>

<span dir="ltr">A supply of money, materials, staff, volunteers, and other assets that can be used by the project to effectively achieve its aims.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Play</span>

<span dir="ltr">Play is the work of children. It consists of activities that are performed for self‐amusement that have behavioural, social, and psychomotor rewards.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Playground</span>

<span dir="ltr">An outdoor area where children can play.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Stakeholders (Partners)</span>

<span dir="ltr">People who have an interest in realising the project in favour of the children.</span>

[^1]: <span dir="ltr">United Nations High Commission for Human Rights - full reference to be supplied</span>

[^2]: <span dir="ltr">Request reference</span>

[^3]: <span dir="ltr">Request reference</span>
