---
title: "Tool 5: Issue Finder"
style: chapter grey tool
---

# **Tool 5** Issue Finder
{:.icon-search}

{% include definition term="Resources" class="non-printing" %}

Explore the legal and practical issues of creating a natural playground by examining policies, regulations and access to **resources**{:data-term="Resources"}.

{% include definition term="Needs Assessment" class="non-printing" %}

*This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**{:data-term="Needs Assessment"}.*

See [Section 1](01.html#playground-safety) for playground safety regulations and a useful checklist to guide you through this tool.
{:.tip-box}

## When do you use the Issue Finder tool?

The Issue Finder tool helps you to plan for the practical implementation of a playground that meets the safety regulations and standards prescribed by your local authorities.

This tool is designed to be used together with your local guidelines and laws that exist to ensure inclusion and safety in the playground. While we want to offer an exciting playground for children, we want to make sure that we have considered the guidelines and laws that will help to reduce the risk of injury to the children who will be playing in it.

Any plan has practical issues that will affect how we implement it. Considering this in advance will prevent us from getting surprised, discouraged or overwhelmed when we start to build our playground.

## Who can use the Issue Finder tool?

-   Individuals
-   Groups or teams
-   Workshop facilitators

## How do you use the Issue Finder tool?

Work through the tool and answer each question as best you can. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more ideas you will have.

Remember that there are no right or wrong answers. Just come up with as many ideas as possible. When you plan, you can decide what to use or not to use.

## Issue Finder

| Age groups | Different age groups have different developmental needs. How will your playground address this? | Enter your ideas here.
| Capacity | How many children can be using the space and equipment? | Enter your ideas here.
| Zones | How much space is there between equipment? | Enter your ideas here.
| Equipment | Does the equipment meet the requirements in terms of height and design? | Enter your ideas here.
| Installation and maintenance | Will this be done by staff, volunteers, or paid for? | Enter your ideas here.
| Resources | What do you need to build the playground? Don’t forget transporting the new equipment to the playground. | Enter your ideas here.
| Other | Are there any other rules, regulations, or issues that need to be considered? | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}
