---
title: "Toolbox"
style: chapter grey tool
---

# Toolbox

## Tools at a glance

### [Tool 1: Partner Finder](06-01.html){:.show-page-number}

Find out who cares about your community or school by defining who has an interest or investment in it.

### [Tool 2: Playground Map](06-02.html){:.show-page-number}

Explore how people experience the playground by mapping the playground and how they use it.

### [Tool 3: Playground Dreams](06-03.html){:.show-page-number}

Explore what you want to include in a playground by defining opportunities and activities for all types of plays and ability levels.

### [Tool 4: Resource Inventory](06-04.html){:.show-page-number}

Explore what resources are available by listing resources in different categories.

### [Tool 5: Issue Finder](06-05.html){:.show-page-number}

Explore the legal and practical issues of creating a natural playground by examining policies, regulations and access to resources.

### [Tool 6: Risk Benefit Assessment](06-06.html){:.show-page-number}

Explore the risks and benefits of playing with loose parts by weighing the likelihood of dangers against the potential benefits.

### [Tool 7: Formulating Objectives](06-07.html){:.show-page-number}

Formulate smart objectives by describing exactly what you want to achieve.

### [Tool 8: Resource Plan](06-08.html){:.show-page-number}

Ensure that everything you have planned can be completed on time and on budget by creating a resource plan that is easy to understand.

### [Tool 9: Monitoring Summary](06-09.html){:.show-page-number}

Ensure that everything you planned gets done by monitoring implementation.

### [Tool 10: Monitoring Safety](06-10.html){:.show-page-number}

Ensure that the playground is a safe place by monitoring safety standards.

### [Tool 11: Monitoring Maintenance](06-11.html){:.show-page-number}

Ensure that your natural playground remains safe by monitoring maintenance issues.

### [Tool 12: Evaluate Results](06-12.html){:.show-page-number}

Ensure that the natural playground offers a variety of opportunities by evaluating it against developmental play needs.
