---
title: "Tool 7: Formulating Objectives"
style: chapter grey tool
---

## Tool 7: Formulating Objectives



Formulate smart objectives by describing exactly what you want to achieve.



### When do you use the Formulating Objectives tool?

Someone once said; “If you don’t know where you are going, how will you know that you got there?”

Well-formulated objectives lead to successful, measurable projects. When you have established what the priority issues are that you want to address in your project, you need to formulate an objective for each one of these priorities.



### Who can use the Formulating Objectives tool?

-   Individuals

-   Groups or teams

-   Workshop facilitators



### How do you use the Formulating Objectives tool?

For each objective, answer the prompts to help you identify how exactly to achieve your goals. For multiple objectives you can copy the prompts onto a piece of paper and write down your answers or you can [<span class="underline">download and print out the worksheet](http://aw-formulating-objectives) to fill it in by hand.



\[Tip box\]

#### Goal:

A goal is the big picture, what you are working towards. For us it is to create or update a natural playground.

#### Objectives:

Each objective is a step you need to take to reach the goal.

#### Activities:

Are the different things we do or deliver (produce) to reach each objective.

\[/Box\]



\[Fillable Form\]

## Formulating Objectives



Header: **Objective:** What aspect of the playground do we want to complete and by when?



> Header: **Activity:** What do we need to do to reach this objective?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Output:** What is the result or product of this activity?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Responsibility:** Who is responsible for completing this activity and when must they complete it?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Inputs:** What resources (people, things, and money) do we need to complete the activity?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Monitoring:** How can we check that the activity is complete?



Header: **Objective:** What aspect of the playground do we want to complete and by when?



> Header: **Activity:** What do we need to do to reach this objective?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Output:** What is the result or product of this activity?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Responsibility:** Who is responsible for completing this activity and when must they complete it?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Inputs:** What resources (people, things, and money) do we need to complete the activity?
>
> 
>
> Header: **Monitoring:** How can we check that the activity is complete?



\[/Fillable Form\]