---
title: "Tool 9: Monitoring Summary"
style: chapter grey tool
---

# **Tool 9** Monitoring Summary
{:.icon-calendar}

{% include definition term="Monitoring" class="non-printing" %}

Ensure that everything you planned gets done by **monitoring**{:data-term="Monitoring"} implementation.

## When do you use the Monitoring Summary tool?

Monitoring is a regular, ongoing activity that provides information you can use to make sure that the implementation of the project is on track. The Monitoring Summary tool helps you summarise your monitoring activities.
{:.tighten-10}

## Who can use the Monitoring Summary tool?

-   Individuals
-   Groups or teams

## How do you use the Monitoring Summary tool?

Just as cars have indicators to show the direction you are going, projects need indicators to show the direction it is going. Once you know where to look you will see that there are many indicators that you can check. Performance indicators monitor that activities are completed during implementation of the natural playground.

{% include definition term="Objective" class="non-printing" %}

For each **objective**{:data-term="Objective"} and activity, identify the indicators needed to measure progress, the way that you will check this indicator, how often you will check it and when it should be completed by. Do this by completing the prompts in the tool below.

For multiple objectives you can {% if site.output == "web" or site.output == "app" %}[download and print out the worksheet]({{ site.baseurl }}/downloads/monitoring-summary.pdf){:target="_blank"} to fill it in by hand or you can {% endif %}copy the prompts onto a piece of paper and write down your answers.

Indicators were already identified when you formulated objectives using [Tool 7](06-07.html){:.show-page-number}.
{:.tip-box}

## Monitoring Summary

| **Reference 1** <br>Objective and Activity |  | Enter your objective and activity here.
| Indicator | Indicators that you identified to measure progress. | Enter your ideas here.
| Means of verification | How will you check the indicator? | Enter your ideas here.
| Frequency | How often will you check? | Enter your ideas here.
| Date | When will this be completed? | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

| **Reference 2** <br>Objective and Activity |  | Enter your objective and activity here.
| Indicator | Indicators that you identified to measure progress. | Enter your ideas here.
| Means of verification | How will you check the indicator? | Enter your ideas here.
| Frequency | How often will you check? | Enter your ideas here.
| Date | When will this be completed? | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}
