---
title: "Tool 4: Resource Inventory"
style: chapter grey tool
---

# **Tool 4** Resource Inventory
{:.icon-list}

{% include definition term="Resources" class="non-printing" %}

Explore what **resources**{:data-term="Resources"} are available by listing resources in different categories.

{% include definition term="Needs Assessment" class="non-printing" %}

*This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**{:data-term="Needs Assessment"}.*

## When do you use the Resource Inventory tool?

You should use the Resource Inventory tool at the start of a project to help you define what resources you have available for each different type of play.

Any space will already have resources that can be used, even if it is only the soil in the yard. By listing the resources into categories, you may find that you have a lot of resources for one type of play but nothing for others.

It is a good idea to complete [Tool 3](06-03.html){:.show-page-number} and Tool 4 at the same time to get an idea of what resources you have and what you will need in the future.
{:.tip-box}

## Who can use the Resource Inventory tool?

-   Individuals
-   Groups or teams
-   Workshop facilitators

## How do you use the Resource Inventory tool?

Work through the tool and come up with as many ideas as possible to complete each block. In each block, write down what resources you already have that can be used to create an activity or opportunity for that type of play. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more information you will have.

## Resource Inventory

| Gross motor play  |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Fine motor play   |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Sensory play      |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Drama play        |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Music play        |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Art play          |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Nature play       |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Sand play         |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Water play        |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Construction play |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Solitary play     |  | Enter your ideas here.
| Loose parts play  |  | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}
