---
title: "Tool 6: Risk Benefit Assessment"
style: chapter grey tool
---

# **Tool 6** Risk Benefit Assessment
{:.icon-scale}

{% include definition term="Loose parts" %}

Explore the risks and benefits of playing with **loose parts**{:data-term="Loose parts"} by weighing the likelihood of dangers against the potential benefits.

{% include definition term="Needs Assessment" %}

*This tool forms part of your **needs assessment**{:data-term="Needs Assessment"}.*

We should encourage opportunities for children to define and take their own risks, but it is of the utmost important that adults are not negligent and do not allow for unacceptable dangers and injuries.
{:.box}

## When do you use the Risk Benefit Assessment tool?

The Risk Benefit Assessment tool helps you to decide if the benefit outweighs the risks when introducing loose parts play.

Childhood is an ongoing process of trial and error with the potential for achievement, but also the certainty of accidents. Children would never learn to walk, climb stairs or ride a bicycle unless they were strongly motivated to take the risk of injury.

Taking risks is how we learn what we are capable of, what we can achieve and how to survive failure. Opportunities for risk in play are very important, if we want our children to develop into brave, confident, competent, and resilient people. When we select loose parts for play, we are offering opportunities for children to create and experience new kinds of risk.

## Who can use the Risk Benefit Assessment tool?

-   Individuals
-   Groups or teams
-   Workshop facilitators

## How do you use the Risk Benefit Assessment tool?

Work through the tool and come up with as many ideas as possible to complete each block. For each group of loose parts, write down the potential physical and emotional benefits for the child, the potential risks of injury, and how best to reduce those risks without limiting the benefits. You can do this exercise on your own or with small teams or groups at a community participation workshop. The more people that work on the worksheet, the more information you will have.

When determining the risks for each group, order them according to the likelihood of them happening. Put risks that are likely to happen daily first, followed by risks likely to happen weekly or monthly and lastly put risks that are likely to happen once a year or never. This is useful in determining the risk to benefit ratio. However, remember that some risks are not worth taking even if they aren’t likely to happen.
{:.tip-box}

## Risk Benefit Assessment

### Tyres, hoops, pallets, boxes, and crates

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

### Blankets, sheets, tarps, ropes, and tape

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

### Buckets, cups, containers, gutters, bottles, and pipes

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

### Kitchen utensils and digging tools

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

###  Wood pieces, blocks, planks, and sticks

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

### Seeds, rocks, leaves, and other small items

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

### Sand

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

### Water

| Potential physical and emotional benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
| Potential risks of injury | | Enter your ideas here.
| How to reduce risk without limiting the benefits | | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}
