---
title: "Tool 8: Activity Plan"
style: chapter grey tool
---

# **Tool 8** Activity Plan
{:.icon-clipboard}

{% include definition term="Budget" %}

Ensure that everything you have planned can be completed on time and on **budget**{:data-term="Budget"} by creating an activity plan that is easy to understand.

## When do you use the Activity Plan tool?

{% include definition term="Objective | Resources" %}

Once you have outlined your **objectives**{:data-term="Objective"} it is important to determine the **resources**{:data-term="Resources"} needed to achieve your goal. You can use the Activity Plan tool to draft a budget for your project. Summarising all resources on one sheet prevents you from duplicating items or persons needed.

## Who can use the Activity Plan tool?

-   Individuals
-   Groups or teams
-   Workshop facilitators

## How do you use the Activity Plan tool?

For each objective and activity, identify the resources needed to complete the activity, potential places or people to source the resources from and the overall cost of resources for that activity. Do this by completing the prompts in the tool below. Once you have completed the tool, use the request for donation sample letter as a guide when contacting possible donors.

For multiple objectives you can copy the prompts onto a piece of paper and write down your answers {% if site.output == "web" or site.output == "app" %}or you can [download and print out the worksheet]({{ site.baseurl }}/downloads/resource-plan.pdf){:target="_blank"} to fill it in by hand{% endif %}.

Use the resource inventory you created in [Tool 4](06-04.html) to answer the prompts and add in new resources only if necessary. This helps you make sure you’re using everything you have and keeping costs down.
{:.tip-box}

## Activity Plan

| **Reference 1** Objective and Activity |  | Enter your objective and activity here.
| Resources | Describe what item or person is needed. | Enter your ideas here.
| Possible Sources | Who could be approached to contribute? | Enter your ideas here.
| Cost | How much will these resources cost? | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

| **Reference 2** Objective and Activity |   | Enter your objective and activity here.
| Resources | Describe what item or person is needed. | Enter your ideas here.
| Possible Sources | Who could be approached to contribute? | Enter your ideas here.
| Cost | How much will these resources cost? | Enter your ideas here.
{:.form}

> ## Sample Letter: Request for donation
> 
> Dear parent/ guardian/ community member,
> 
> ### Request for LOOSE PARTS for our new playground
> 
> At the Most Fantastic Pre‐School we believe that play is critically important to the development of our children. We would like to empower our children’s creativity! We want our children to a variety of different materials and objects (loose parts) to move, carry, combine, redesign, line‐up, take apart and put back together in multiple ways!
> 
> By stocking our new active open play space, located in the centre of our school, with loose parts we want to offer children:
> 
> -   daily inspiration
> -   endless possibilities
> -   a chance to think
> -   encouragement to be creative
> 
> Why do we believe this is important? With children’s natural curiosity and creativity, using loose parts will support brain development, scientific experimenting, mathematical thinking, risk-taking, and learning by trial and error ‐ skills we want our children to have to be successful for the rest of their lives!
> 
> In order to stock up, we need your help to gather all that we need for our ‘loose parts’. If you have anything at home, or anything you can perhaps gather with your children on an  outing, we would very much appreciate it. Please see the list below for items we are looking for.
> 
> We appreciate your help and thank you for your support
> 
> Kind regards,
> 
> MS E.C, Diva
> 
> Principal Teacher
> 
> #### Loose parts:
> 
> -   Plastic pipes or plastic connections (different sizes)
> -   Plastic crates and empty boxes
> -   Leaves, feathers, shells, pine cones
> -   Velcro straps
> -   Washing pegs
> -   Old sheets
> -   Tarps
> -   Wooden pallets
> -   Buckets
> -   Old kitchen equipment such as pots, pans, spoons (no knives)
> -   Trays
> -   Cable drums
> -   Trees to plant in our garden
> -   Tyres (car, bicycle or motorbike)
> -   Wheelbarrows
> -   Old suitcases
> -   Baskets
> -   Old clothes for dressing up
> -   Logs
> -   Smooth planks
> -   Sticks
> -   River sand
> -   Plastic containers
{:.box}
