---
title: "Toolbox"
style: chapter page-1
---

# Toolbox

## <span dir="ltr">Tool 1: Partner Finder</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">Find out who cares about your community or school by defining who has an interest or investment in it.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

**<span dir="ltr">When do you use the Partner Finder tool?</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Communities are not just groups of people that stay in the same area, they can also be groups with a common interest like a school or workplace or people that live elsewhere but have an interest in the area like business owners, organisations or government departments.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Defining your community helps you to decide who should be involved or can contribute to your natural playground Needs Assessment with manpower, resources, perspectives, experience, expertise, and insights.</span>

<span dir="ltr">You can use the Partner Finder at the start of a project to help you define who the stakeholders are in your community.</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Who can use the Partner Finder tool?</span>**

-   <span dir="ltr">Individuals</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Groups or teams</span>

-   <span dir="ltr">Workshop Facilitators</span>

**<span dir="ltr">How do you use the Partner Finder tool?</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Work individually or as a group to come up with as many names as possible to complete each column. The more people you are that work on the worksheet, the more ideas you will have. Remember that there are no right or wrong answers, just come up with as many ideas as possible. When you plan, you can decide who to use or not to use. The next step after you’ve completed the Partner Finder tool is to appoint someone to get the contact details for each of the people you listed.</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">\[Fillable Form\]</span>

**<span dir="ltr">Partner Finder</span>**

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who know something about child development and play.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: Social workers, academics, occupational therapists, nurses, doctors, teachers, psychologists, etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who are affected by the lack of a playground.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: Children, community members, local government, school principals , youth workers, local businesses, etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who come from different cultures.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: Culture, nationality, language, interest groups etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: People who have special needs or different abilities.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: People with disabilities, old people, youth, children, women, etc.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Header: Organisations that work with children.</span>

<span dir="ltr">Example Text: NGOs, CBOs, faith-based organisations, shelters, schools.</span>

<span dir="ltr">\[/Fillable Form\]</span>

<span dir="ltr"></span>

<span dir="ltr">If you prefer you can **download the worksheet** \[AW-partner-finder\] and print it out.</span>

[^1]: <span dir="ltr">United Nations High Commission for Human Rights - full reference to be supplied</span>

[^2]: <span dir="ltr">Request reference</span>

[^3]: <span dir="ltr">Request reference</span>
